%%%%%%%%%%%%%
Release Notes
%%%%%%%%%%%%%


###############
Version History
###############

This table tracks the meta-package versions and the version of each Qiskit element installed:

.. version-history:: **Version History**

.. note::

   For the ``0.7.0``, ``0.7.1``, and ``0.7.2`` meta-package releases the
   :ref:`versioning_strategy` policy was not formalized yet.


###############
Notable Changes
###############

*************
Qiskit 0.39.4
*************

Terra 0.22.3
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.2:

Aer 0.11.2
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.2_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/add-python-311-support-027047fb389116dd.yaml @ b'1d2520d3197bf8a59d62965ade6b4cae8c7ed5b5'

- Added support for running Qiskit Aer with Python 3.11 support.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.2_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_aer_statevector_mps-c3dd40b936700ff4.yaml @ b'7a881dd758b327566f4e9726771b5960fa2c50d8'

- Fix two bugs in AerStatevector. AerStatevector uses mc* instructions, which are
  not enabled in matrix_product_state method. This commit changes AerStatevector
  not to use MC* and use H, X, Y, Z, U and CX. AerStatevector also failed if an
  instruction is decomposed to empty QuantumCircuit. This commit allows such
  instruction.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-AerSimulator_from_backend_BackendV2-bccf835bc42a193d.yaml @ b'a7d802fa0d16b9899200ae851bd061f8f7843da1'

- Fixed support in the :meth:`.AerSimulator.from_backend` method for instantiating
  an :class:`~.AerSimulator` instance from an a :class:`~.BackendV2` object.
  Previously, attempting to use :meth:`.AerSimulator.from_backend` with a
  :class:`~.BackendV2` object would have raised an :class:`~.AerError` saying this
  wasn't supported.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-device-noise-models-2eca2f9c9dc25771.yaml @ b'0ced15bb5a7137563134789357d973743d25977d'

- Fixes a bug where :meth:`NoiseModel.from_backend` with a ``BackendV2`` object may generate
  a noise model with excessive ``QuantumError`` s on non-Gate instructions while,
  for example, only ``ReadoutError`` s should be sufficient for measures.
  This commit updates :meth:`NoiseModel.from_backend` with a ``BackendV2`` object so that
  it returns the same noise model as that called with the corresponding ``BackendV1`` object.
  That is, the resulting noise model does not contain any ``QuantumError`` s on measures and
  it may contain only thermal relaxation errors on other non-gate instructions such as resets.
  Note that it still contains ``ReadoutError`` s on measures.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-temperature-a9c51c4599af3a49.yaml @ b'5bcb45434ae5af6e02f6945555670bf47a3d9ca6'

- Fixed a bug in :meth:`NoiseModel.from_backend` where using the ``temperature`` kwarg with
  a non-default value would incorrectly compute the excited state population for
  the specified temperature. Previously, there was an additional factor of 2 in
  the Boltzman distribution calculation leading to an incorrect smaller value
  for the excited state population.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-topological-control-flow-e2f1a25098004f00.yaml @ b'f8babdd98b627b23d895316ccf9725c4fde60935'

- Fixed incorrect logic in the control-flow compiler that could allow unrelated instructions to
  appear "inside" control-flow bodies during execution, causing incorrect results.  For example,
  previously::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator

      backend = AerSimulator(method="statevector")

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(3, 3)
      circuit.measure(0, 0)
      circuit.measure(1, 1)

      with circuit.if_test((0, True)):
          with circuit.if_test((1, False)):
              circuit.x(2)

      with circuit.if_test((0, False)):
          with circuit.if_test((1, True)):
              circuit.x(2)

      circuit.measure(range(3), range(3))
      print(backend.run(circuit, method=method, shots=100).result())

  would print ``{'010': 100}`` as the nested control-flow operations would accidentally jump over
  the first X gate on qubit 2, which should have been executed.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vervose-warnings-efbbbfcb4b65a2a5.yaml @ b'15a02738cac23033f42e66bbbe19121d2c1eebc0'

- Fixes a bug where ``NoiseModel.from_backend()`` prints verbose warnings when
  supplying a backend that reports un-physical device parameters such as T2 > 2 * T1
  due to statistical errors in their estimation.
  This commit removes such warnings because they are not actionable for users in the sense
  that there are no means other than truncating them to the theoretical bounds as
  done within ``noise.device`` module.
  See `Issue 1631 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1631>`__
  for details of the fixed bug.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_GPU_statevector-715da5ead0a59fb5.yaml @ b'286690076c1472ecda6211b832fcdff2b9d7598d'

- This is fix for GPU statevector simulator.
  Chunk distribution tried to allocate all free memory on GPU,
  but this causes memory allocation error.
  So this fix allocates 80 percent of free memory.
  Also this fixes size of matrix buffer when noise sampling is applied.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_cache_blocking_AerState-ccb035bb5be6f895.yaml @ b'6b2b8b5c4c0e0dfa748704d07ff9b1519f17001c'

- This is a fix of AerState running with cache blocking. AerState wrongly configured
  transpiler of Aer for cache blocking, and then its algorithm to swap qubits
  worked wrongly. This fix corrects AerState to use this transpiler. More specifically,
  After the transpilation, a swapped qubit map is recoverd to the original map
  when using AerState. This fix is necessary for AerStatevector to use multiple-GPUs.

.. releasenotes/notes/improve-statevector-initialization-75274fdcb4106d24.yaml @ b'e6248e21e430375d693fccad4a206740fafda54e'

- This is fix for AerStatevector.
  It was not possible to create an AerStatevector instance directly from
  terra's Statevector.
  This fix allows a Statevector as AerStatevector's input.

.. releasenotes/notes/sampler-counts-90e5aaabccdc415b.yaml @ b'8d34a8d3b011426714ceda417f95f5a3c9076143'

- :attr:`.SamplerResult.quasi_dists` contain the data about the number of qubits.
  :meth:`QuasiDistribution.binary_probabilities` returns bitstrings with correct length.

.. releasenotes/notes/set_seed_for_each_in_aerstatevec-ef5fcac628dec63b.yaml @ b'cb8b33514475c6d07dd82984d870c75324a9424a'

- Previously seed is not initialized in AerStatevector and then sampled results
  are always same. With this commit, a seed is initialized for each sampling
  and sampled results can be vary.


IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.39.3
*************

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.3:

Terra 0.22.3
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.3_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.22.3-cdc2d5c29ec5555e.yaml @ b'92fc7082b422241f2c5c4543aaea31e9eabef922'

Qiskit Terra 0.22.3 is a minor bugfix release, fixing some further bugs in the 0.22 series.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/adapt-vqe-supports-aux-operators-1383103839a338c6.yaml @ b'3caa782638389e66f8f2a70ea111b796a169aa13'

- :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolver.AdaptVQE` now correctly
  indicates that it supports auxiliary operators.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-cregbundle-warning-d3c991bb6276761d.yaml @ b'2f338866358b80e5bcc7e4520800813a3a8a3a23'

- The circuit drawers (:meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` and :func:`.circuit_drawer`) will no
  longer emit a warning about the ``cregbundle`` parameter when using the default arguments,
  if the content of the circuit requires all bits to be drawn individually.  This was most
  likely to appear when trying to draw circuits with new-style control-flow operations.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qnspsa-max-evals-grouped-52eb462fa6c82079.yaml @ b'92fc7082b422241f2c5c4543aaea31e9eabef922'

- Fixed a bug causing :class:`.QNSPSA` to fail when ``max_evals_grouped`` was set to a
  value larger than 1.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-sabre-swap-random-seed-dcf3dace63042791.yaml @ b'b9f3b523b15f50871bf75b6c07f73d10a6d3eceb'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.SabreSwap` pass which would cause the
  output of multiple runs of the pass without the ``seed`` argument specified
  to reuse the same random number generator seed between runs instead of
  using different seeds. This previously caused identical results to be
  returned between runs even when no ``seed`` was specified.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-serialization-primitives-c1e44a37cfe7a32a.yaml @ b'775ac1e1d5d7e621d100f0c1a428e75be8e64be0'

- Fixed an issue with the primitive classes, :class:`~.BackendSampler` and :class:`~.BackendEstimator`,
  where instances were not able to be serialized with ``pickle``. In general these classes are not guaranteed
  to be serializable as :class:`~.BackendV2` and :class:`~.BackendV1` instances are not required to be
  serializable (and often are not), but the class definitions of :class:`~.BackendSampler` and
  :class:`~.BackendEstimator` no longer prevent the use of ``pickle``.

.. releasenotes/notes/reinstate-pulse-instruction-draw-7bf4bbabaa1f1862.yaml @ b'92fc7082b422241f2c5c4543aaea31e9eabef922'

- The :meth:`.pulse.Instruction.draw` method will now succeed, as before.
  This method is deprecated with no replacement planned, but it should
  still work for the period of deprecation.


Aer 0.11.1
==========

No change


IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.39.2
*************

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.2:

Terra 0.22.2
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.22.2-cd8a0fa538c623b9.yaml @ b'dac39d0b10638a2d35819d3caee5895e05cab254'

Qiskit Terra 0.22.2 is a minor bugfix release, and marks the first official support for Python 3.11.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.22.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-backend-primitive-no-max-experiments-e2ca41ec61de353e.yaml @ b'bece288c0f677cb1f783ea1c355839efbccf3523'

- Fixed an issue with the backend primitive classes :class:`~.BackendSampler`
  and :class:`~.BackendEstimator` which prevented running with a
  :class:`~.BackendV1` instance that does not have a ``max_experiments``
  field set in its :class:`~.BackendConfiguration`.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vf2post-regression-d4b057ea02ce00d3.yaml @ b'1e3cad33efecaccbd83c28cdaf5b1f8df4fcba39'

- Fixed a bug in the :class:`.VF2PostLayout` pass when transpiling for backends
  with a defined :class:`.Target`, where the interaction graph would be built
  incorrectly.  This could result in excessive runtimes due to the graph being
  far more complex than necessary.

.. releasenotes/notes/remove-pulse-deepcopy-9a19aa7f6452248b.yaml @ b'e61b93f5513355a820a953a3b1ac53f9fcc3f2ba'

- The Pulse expression parser should no longer periodically hang when called
  from Jupyter notebooks.  This is achieved by avoiding an internal ``deepycopy``
  of a recursive object that seemed to be particularly difficult for the
  memoization to evaluate.

Aer 0.11.1
==========

No change


IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.39.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.22.1:

Terra 0.22.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.22.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.22.1-dec5623f902c4e7d.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

Qiskit Terra 0.22.1 is a bugfix release, addressing some minor issues identified since the 0.22.0 release.


.. _Release Notes_0.22.1_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-pauli-basis-dep-27c0a4506ad38d2c.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- The ``pauli_list`` kwarg of :func:`.pauli_basis` has been deprecated as
  :func:`.pauli_basis` now always returns a :class:`.PauliList`. This argument
  was removed prematurely from Qiskit Terra 0.22.0 which broke compatibility
  for users that were leveraging the ``pauli_list``argument. Now, the argument
  has been restored but will emit a ``DeprecationWarning`` when used. If used
  it has no effect because since Qiskit Terra 0.22.0 a :class:`~.PauliList` is
  always returned.


.. _Release Notes_0.22.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-barrier-before-final-measurements-loose-1849282c11fc5eb0.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed the :class:`.BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements` transpiler pass when there
  are conditions on loose :class:`.Clbit`\ s immediately before the final measurement
  layer.  Previously, this would fail claiming that the bit was not present
  in an internal temporary circuit.
  Fixed `#8923 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8923>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-circuit-condition-compare-d8d85e5ca47c1416.yaml @ b'e3849ad1fa02e6515b4fc37b5b8b462a5cb47c5d'

- The equality checkers for :class:`.QuantumCircuit` and :class:`.DAGCircuit`
  (with objects of the same type) will now correctly handle conditions on single
  bits.  Previously, these would produce false negatives for equality, as the
  bits would use "exact" equality checks instead of the "semantic" checks the rest
  of the properties of circuit instructions get.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-clbit-handling-stochasticswap-controlflow-fbb9d8fab5040643.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed handling of classical bits in :class:`.StochasticSwap` with control flow.
  Previously, control-flow operations would be expanded to contain all the
  classical bits in the outer circuit and not contracted again, leading to a
  mismatch between the numbers of clbits the instruction reported needing and
  the actual number supplied to it.
  Fixed `#8903 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8903>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-global-inst-qarg-method-target-a9188e172ea7f325.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed handling of globally defined instructions for the :class:`~.Target`
  class. Previously, two methods, :meth:`~.Target.operations_for_qargs` and
  :meth:`~.Target.operation_names_for_qargs` would ignore/incorrectly handle
  any globally defined ideal operations present in the target. For example::

      from qiskit.transpiler import Target
      from qiskit.circuit.library import CXGate

      target = Target(num_qubits=5)
      target.add_instruction(CXGate())
      names = target.operation_names_for_qargs((1, 2))
      ops = target.operations_for_qargs((1, 2))

  will now return ``{"cx"}`` for ``names`` and ``[CXGate()]`` for ``ops``
  instead of raising a ``KeyError`` or an empty return.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-global-inst-qarg-method-target-a9188e172ea7f325.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`.Target.add_instruction` method where it
  would previously have accepted an argument with an invalid number of
  qubits as part of the ``properties`` argument. For example::

      from qiskit.transpiler import Target
      from qiskit.circuit.library import CXGate

      target = Target()
      target.add_instruction(CXGate(), {(0, 1, 2): None})

  This will now correctly raise a ``TranspilerError`` instead of causing
  runtime issues when interacting with the target.
  Fixed `#8914 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8914>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-hinton-bug-1141a297050f55bb.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`.plot_state_hinton` visualization function
  which would result in a misplaced axis that was offset from the actual
  plot.
  Fixed `#8446 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8446>`

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-hinton-bug-1141a297050f55bb.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed the output of the :func:`.plot_state_hinton` function so that the state labels
  are ordered ordered correctly, and the image matches up with the natural matrix
  ordering.
  Fixed `#8324 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8324>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-max_circuits-backend-primitives-c70590bca557001f.yaml @ b'45de12a4bdc0a09e1557750e97c56a0e60e8a3cb'

- Fixed an issue with the primitive classes, :class:`~.BackendSampler` and
  :class:`~.BackendEstimator` when running on backends that have a limited
  number of circuits in each job. Not all backends support an unlimited
  batch size (most hardware backends do not) and previously the backend
  primitive classes would have potentially incorrectly sent more circuits
  than the backend supported. This has been corrected so that
  :class:`~.BackendSampler` and :class:`~.BackendEstimator` will chunk the
  circuits into multiple jobs if the backend has a limited number of
  circuits per job.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-max_circuits-backend-primitives-c70590bca557001f.yaml @ b'45de12a4bdc0a09e1557750e97c56a0e60e8a3cb'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.BackendEstimator` class where previously
  setting a run option named ``monitor`` to a value that evaluated as
  ``True`` would have incorrectly triggered a job monitor that only
  worked on backends from the ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` package. This
  has been removed so that you can use a ``monitor`` run option if needed
  without causing any issues.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-mixed-ideal-target-coupling-map-7fca04f9c5139a49.yaml @ b'147b7575f7b5925add5ec09557aa7afa8c08ee7f'

- Fixed an issue with the :meth:`.Target.build_coupling_map` method where
  it would incorrectly return ``None`` for a :class:`~.Target` object
  with a mix of ideal globally available instructions and instructions
  that have qubit constraints. Now in such cases the
  :meth:`.Target.build_coupling_map` will return a coupling map for the
  constrained instruction (unless it's a 2 qubit operation which will
  return ``None`` because globally there is no connectivity constraint).
  Fixed `#8971 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8971>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-mixed-ideal-target-coupling-map-7fca04f9c5139a49.yaml @ b'147b7575f7b5925add5ec09557aa7afa8c08ee7f'

- Fixed an issue with the :attr:`.Target.qargs` attribute where it would
  incorrectly return ``None`` for a :class:`~.Target` object that contained
  any globally available ideal instruction.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-pauli-basis-dep-27c0a4506ad38d2c.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed the premature removal of the ``pauli_list`` keyword argument of
  the :func:`.pauli_basis` function which broke existing code using the
  ``pauli_list=True`` future compatibility path on upgrade to Qiskit Terra
  0.22.0. This keyword argument has been added back to the function and is
  now deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qpy-custom-controlled-gate-a9355df1a88a83a5.yaml @ b'6c4a3b62f71b622b25caef63c2a196aa01215480'

- Fixed an issue in QPY serialization (:func:`~.qpy.dump`) when a custom
  :class:`~.ControlledGate` subclass that overloaded the ``_define()``
  method to provide a custom definition for the operation. Previously,
  this case of operation was not serialized correctly because it wasn't
  accounting for using the potentially ``_define()`` method to provide
  a definition.
  Fixes `#8794 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8794>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qpy-loose-bits-5283dc4ad3823ce3.yaml @ b'e0befd769fc54e9f50cdc4b355983b9d1eda6f31'

- QPY deserialisation will no longer add extra :class:`.Clbit` instances to the
  circuit if there are both loose :class:`.Clbit`\ s in the circuit and more
  :class:`.Qubit`\ s than :class:`.Clbit`\ s.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qpy-loose-bits-5283dc4ad3823ce3.yaml @ b'e0befd769fc54e9f50cdc4b355983b9d1eda6f31'

- QPY deserialisation will no longer add registers named `q` and `c` if the
  input circuit contained only loose bits.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-sparse-pauli-real-63c31d87801671b1.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed the :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.dot` method when run on two operators with
  real coefficients. To fix this, the dtype that :class:`SparsePauliOp` can
  take is restricted to ``np.complex128`` and ``object``.
  Fixed `#8992 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8992>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-styles-manifest-b8c852a07fb86966.yaml @ b'c336cf583285ad4803c3ef02a15eac3651655434'

- Fixed an issue in the :func:`~.circuit_drawer` function and
  :func:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method where the only built-in style
  for the ``mpl`` output that was usable was ``default``. If another
  built-in style, such as ``iqx``, were used then a warning about
  the style not being found would be emitted and the drawer would
  fall back to use the ``default`` style.
  Fixed `#8991 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8991>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-target-transpile-parallel-772f943a08d0570b.yaml @ b'3af82426f9cbb25d47bf50b9c218ce9d30f79fdd'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~.transpile` where it would previously
  fail with a ``TypeError`` if a custom :class:`~.Target` object was
  passed in via the ``target`` argument and a list of multiple circuits
  were specified for the ``circuits`` argument.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-transpile-ideal-measurement-c37e04533e196ded.yaml @ b'bcec3b9e3ec792387a72fe3400b491e666d02eb6'

- Fixed an issue with :func:`~.transpile` when targeting a :class:`~.Target`
  (either directly via the ``target`` argument or via a
  :class:`~.BackendV2` instance from the ``backend`` argument) that
  contained an ideal :class:`~.Measure` instruction (one that does not have
  any properties defined). Previously this would raise an exception
  trying to parse the target.
  Fixed `#8969 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8969>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vf2-layout-no-noise-22261601684710c3.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.VF2Layout` pass where it would error
  when running with a :class:`~.Target` that had instructions that were
  missing error rates. This has been corrected so in such cases the
  lack of an error rate will be treated as an ideal implementation and
  if no error rates are present it will just select the first matching
  layout.
  Fixed `#8970 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8970>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vf2-layout-no-noise-22261601684710c3.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.VF2PostLayout` pass where it would
  error when running with a :class:`~.Target` that had instructions that
  were missing. In such cases the lack of an error rate will be treated as
  an ideal implementation of the operation.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vqd-kgt2-1ed95de3e32102c1.yaml @ b'6ef8691ab7ede702c48f57087b27f88ad08427fc'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.eigensolvers.VQD` class if more than
  ``k=2`` eigenvalues were computed. Previously this would fail due to an
  internal type mismatch, but now runs as expected.
  Fixed `#8982 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8982>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-vqe-default-batching-eb08e6ce17907da3.yaml @ b'695bfb9ecfaf3c9127a63055d874e0a72a8ed122'

- Fixed a performance bug where the new primitive-based variational algorithms
  :class:`.minimum_eigensolvers.VQE`, :class:`.eigensolvers.VQD` and :class:`.SamplingVQE`
  did not batch energy evaluations per default, which resulted in a significant slowdown
  if a hardware backend was used.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-zero-operand-gates-323510ec8f392f27.yaml @ b'ad6f295ea2eaa0e6142db87a3abbf3d7fac5dec8'

- Zero-operand gates and instructions will now work with
  :func:`.circuit_to_gate`, :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_gate`,
  :meth:`.Gate.control`, and the construction of an
  :class:`~.quantum_info.Operator` from a :class:`.QuantumCircuit` containing
  zero-operand instructions.  This edge case is occasionally useful in creating
  global-phase gates as part of larger compound instructions, though for many
  uses, :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` may be more appropriate.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_8897-2a90c4b0857c19c2.yaml @ b'8a5dbc96f66a0c3355a30b384e83488c918628e6'

- Fixes issue where :meth:`.Statevector.evolve` and :meth:`.DensityMatrix.evolve`
  would raise an exeception for nested subsystem evolution for non-qubit
  subsystems.
  Fixes `issue #8897 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8897>`_

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_8897-2a90c4b0857c19c2.yaml @ b'8a5dbc96f66a0c3355a30b384e83488c918628e6'

- Fixes bug in :meth:`.Statevector.evolve` where subsystem evolution
  will return the incorrect value in certain cases where there are 2 or more
  than non-evolved subsystems with different subsystem dimensions.
  Fixes `issue #8899 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8899>`_


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.1:

Aer 0.11.1
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/cmake_cuda_arch-817eb0b7232bd291.yaml @ b'8c4b6c145d55a1ec16d42ea061b02b8c82262db6'

- Fixed a potential build error when trying to use CMake 3.18 or newer and
  building qiskit-aer with GPU support enabled. Since CMake 3.18 or later
  when building with CUDA the ``CMAKE_CUDA_ARCHITECTURES`` was required to
  be set with the architecture value for the target GPU. This has been
  corrected so that setting ``AER_CUDA_ARCH`` will be used if this was
  not set.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-local-noise-pass-83815d5a80f9a0e9.yaml @ b'040de7a8018a4ae46279d340bde475825c66111f'

- Fixes a bug in the handling of instructions with clbits in :class:`.LocalNoisePass`.
  Previously, it was accidentally erasing clbits of instructions (e.g. measures)
  to which the noise is applied in the case of ``method="append"``.

.. releasenotes/notes/sampler-cache-78f916cedb0c5421.yaml @ b'b8f4db645c38caceafc69d51a9ad74f73a6666eb'

- Fixed the performance overhead of the Sampler class when running with identical circuits on multiple executions.
  This was accomplished by skipping/caching the transpilation of these identical circuits on subsequent executions.

.. releasenotes/notes/support_terra_primitive_022-8852b784608bcdcb.yaml @ b'de3abb55bfe118905f66dd79a8d4537bd646e849'

- Fixed compatibility of the  :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primitives.Sampler` and :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primtives.Estimator`
  primitive classes with qiskit-terra 0.22.0 release. In qiskit-terra 0.22.0 breaking API changes were made to the
  abstract interface which broke compatibility with these classes, this has been addressed so that
  :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primitives.Sampler` and :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primtives.Estimator` can now be used with
  qiskit-terra >= 0.22.0.

IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.39.0
*************

This release also officially deprecates the Qiskit Aer project as part of the Qiskit metapackage.
This means that in a future release ``pip install qiskit`` will no longer include ``qiskit-aer``.
If you're currently installing or listing ``qiskit`` as a dependency to get Aer you should upgrade
this to explicitly list ``qiskit-aer`` as well.

The ``qiskit-aer`` project is still active and maintained moving forward but for the Qiskit
metapackage (i.e. what gets installed via ``pip install qiskit``) the project is moving towards
a model where the Qiskit package only contains the common core functionality for building and
compiling quantum circuits, programs, and applications and packages that build on it or link
Qiskit to hardware or simulators are separate packages.

Terra 0.22.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.22.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/prepare-0.22-118e15de86d36072.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

The Qiskit Terra 0.22.0 release is a major feature release that includes
a myriad of new feature and bugfixes. The highlights for this release are:

  * Adding initial support to the transpiler for transpiling
    :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` objects that contain control flow instructions
    such as :class:`~.ForLoopOp` and :class:`~.WhileLoopOp`.

  * Greatly improved scaling and performance for the :func:`~.transpile` function
    with large numbers of qubits, especially when ``optimization_level=3`` is used.

  * External plugin interface for :func:`~.transpile` that enables external
    packages to implement stages for the default pass managers. More details on this
    can be found at :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.plugin`.
    Additionally, :class:`~.BackendV2` backends can now optionally set
    custom default plugins to use for the scheduling and translation stages.

  * Updated algorithm implementations in :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` that leverage
    the :mod:`~.primitives` classes that implement the :class:`~.BaseSampler` and
    :class:`~.BaseEstimator`.


.. _Release Notes_0.22.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-target-control-flow-representation-09520e2838f0657e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Add support for representing an operation that has a variable width
  to the :class:`~.Target` class. Previously, a :class:`~.Target` object
  needed to have an instance of :class:`~Operation` defined for each
  operation supported in the target. This was used for both validation
  of arguments and parameters of the operation. However, for operations
  that have a variable width this wasn't possible because each instance
  of an :class:`~Operation` class can only have a fixed number of qubits.
  For cases where a backend supports variable width operations the
  instruction can be added with the class of the operation instead of an
  instance. In such cases the operation will be treated as globally
  supported on all qubits. For example, if building a target like::

      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter, Measure, IfElseOp, ForLoopOp, WhileLoopOp
      from qiskit.circuit.library import IGate, RZGate, SXGate, XGate, CXGate
      from qiskit.transpiler import Target, InstructionProperties

      theta = Parameter("theta")

      ibm_target = Target()
      i_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000413),
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000502),
          (2,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.0004003),
          (3,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000614),
          (4,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.006149),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(IGate(), i_props)
      rz_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=0, error=0),
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=0, error=0),
          (2,): InstructionProperties(duration=0, error=0),
          (3,): InstructionProperties(duration=0, error=0),
          (4,): InstructionProperties(duration=0, error=0),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(RZGate(theta), rz_props)
      sx_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000413),
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000502),
          (2,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.0004003),
          (3,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000614),
          (4,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.006149),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(SXGate(), sx_props)
      x_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000413),
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000502),
          (2,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.0004003),
          (3,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.000614),
          (4,): InstructionProperties(duration=35.5e-9, error=0.006149),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(XGate(), x_props)
      cx_props = {
          (3, 4): InstructionProperties(duration=270.22e-9, error=0.00713),
          (4, 3): InstructionProperties(duration=305.77e-9, error=0.00713),
          (3, 1): InstructionProperties(duration=462.22e-9, error=0.00929),
          (1, 3): InstructionProperties(duration=497.77e-9, error=0.00929),
          (1, 2): InstructionProperties(duration=227.55e-9, error=0.00659),
          (2, 1): InstructionProperties(duration=263.11e-9, error=0.00659),
          (0, 1): InstructionProperties(duration=519.11e-9, error=0.01201),
          (1, 0): InstructionProperties(duration=554.66e-9, error=0.01201),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(CXGate(), cx_props)
      measure_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.813e-6, error=0.0751),
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.813e-6, error=0.0225),
          (2,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.813e-6, error=0.0146),
          (3,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.813e-6, error=0.0215),
          (4,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.813e-6, error=0.0333),
      }
      ibm_target.add_instruction(Measure(), measure_props)
      ibm_target.add_instruction(IfElseOp, name="if_else")
      ibm_target.add_instruction(ForLoopOp, name="for_loop")
      ibm_target.add_instruction(WhileLoopOp, name="while_loop")

  The :class:`~.IfElseOp`, :class:`~.ForLoopOp`, and :class:`~.WhileLoopOp`
  operations are globally supported for any number of qubits. This is then
  reflected by other calls in the :class:`~.Target` API such as
  :meth:`~.Target.instruction_supported`::

      ibm_target.instruction_supported(operation_class=WhileLoopOp, qargs=(0, 2, 3, 4))
      ibm_target.instruction_supported('if_else', qargs=(0, 1))

  both return ``True``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/prepare-0.22-118e15de86d36072.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added new primitive implementations, :class:`~.BackendSampler` and :class:`~.BackendEstimator`,
  to :mod:`qiskit.primitives`. Thes new primitive class implementation wrap a :class:`~.BackendV1`
  or :class:`~.BackendV2` instance as a :class:`~.BaseSampler` or :class:`~.BaseEstimator`
  respectively. The intended use case for these primitive implementations is to bridge the gap
  between providers that do not have native primitive implementations and use that provider's
  backend with APIs that work with primitives. For example, the :class:`~.SamplingVQE` class
  takes a :class:`~.BaseSampler` instance to function. If you'd like to run that class with
  a backend from a provider without a native primitive implementation you can construct a
  :class:`~.BackendSampler` to do this::

      from qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers import SamplingVQE
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SLSQP
      from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
      from qiskit.primitives import BackendSampler
      from qiskit.providers.fake_provider import FakeHanoi
      from qiskit.opflow import PauliSumOp
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

      backend = FakeHanoi()
      sampler = BackendSampler(backend=backend)

      operator = PauliSumOp(SparsePauliOp(["ZZ", "IZ", "II"], coeffs=[1, -0.5, 0.12]))
      ansatz = TwoLocal(rotation_blocks=["ry", "rz"], entanglement_blocks="cz")
      optimizer = SLSQP()
      sampling_vqe = SamplingVQE(sampler, ansatz, optimizer)
      result = sampling_vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(operator)
      eigenvalue = result.eigenvalue

  If you're using a provider that has native primitive implementations (such as
  ``qiskit-ibm-runtime`` or ``qiskit-aer``) it is always a better choice to use that native
  primitive implementation instead of :class:`~.BackendEstimator` or :class:`~.BackendSampler`
  as the native implementations will be much more efficient and/or do additional pre and post
  processing. :class:`~.BackendEstimator` and :class:`~.BackendSampler` are designed to be
  generic that can work with any backend that returns :class:`~.Counts` in their
  :class:`~.Results` which precludes additional optimization.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/adapt-vqe-0f71234cb6ec92f8.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new algorithm class, :class:`~.AdaptVQE` to :mod:`qiskit.algorithms`
  This algorithm uses a :class:`qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers.VQE`
  in combination with a pool of operators from which to build out an
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.EvolvedOperatorAnsatz` adaptively.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers import AdaptVQE, VQE
    from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SLSQP
    from qiskit.primitives import Estimator
    from qiskit.circuit.library import EvolvedOperatorAnsatz

    # get your Hamiltonian
    hamiltonian = ...

    # construct your ansatz
    ansatz = EvolvedOperatorAnsatz(...)

    vqe = VQE(Estimator(), ansatz, SLSQP())

    adapt_vqe = AdaptVQE(vqe)

    result = adapt_vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(hamiltonian)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-backend-custom-passes-cddfd05c8704a4b1.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.BackendV2` class now has support for two new optional hook
  points enabling backends to inject custom compilation steps as part of
  :func:`~.transpile` and :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager`. If a
  :class:`~.BackendV2` implementation includes the methods
  ``get_scheduling_stage_plugin()`` or ``get_translation_stage_plugin()`` the
  transpiler will use the returned string as the default value for
  the ``scheduling_method`` and ``translation_method`` arguments. This enables
  backends to run additional custom transpiler passes when targetting that
  backend by leveraging the transpiler stage
  :mod:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.plugin` interface.
  For more details on how to use this see: :ref:`custom_transpiler_backend`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-backend-custom-passes-cddfd05c8704a4b1.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new keyword argument, ``ignore_backend_supplied_default_methods``, to the
  :func:`~.transpile` function which can be used to disable a backend's
  custom selection of a default method if the target backend has
  ``get_scheduling_stage_plugin()`` or ``get_translation_stage_plugin()``
  defined.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-barrier-label-8e677979cb37461e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a ``label`` parameter to the :class:`.Barrier` class's constructor
  and the :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.barrier` method which allows a user to
  assign a label to an instance of the :class:`~.Barrier` directive. For
  visualizations generated with :func:`~.circuit_drawer` or
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` this label will be printed at the top of the
  ``barrier``.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.h(0)
      circuit.h(1)
      circuit.barrier(label="After H")
      circuit.draw('mpl')

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-ccz-cs-and-csdg-gates-4ad05e323f1dec4d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Add new gates :class:`.CCZGate`, :class:`.CSGate`, and :class:`.CSdgGate`
  to the standard gates in the Circuit Library
  (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-eigensolvers-with-primitives-8b3a9f55f5fd285f.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.eigensolvers` package to include
  interfaces for primitive-enabled algorithms. This new module
  will eventually replace the previous ``qiskit.algorithms.eigen_solvers``.
  This new module contains an alternative implementation of the
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.eigensolvers.VQD` which instead of taking
  a backend or :class:`~.QuantumInstance` instead takes an instance of
  :class:`~.BaseEstimator`, including :class:`~.Estimator`,
  :class:`~.BackendEstimator`, or any provider implementations such as
  those as those present in ``qiskit-ibm-runtime`` and ``qiskit-aer``.

  For example, to use the new implementation with an instance of
  :class:`~.Estimator` class:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms.eigensolvers import VQD
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SLSQP
      from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
      from qiskit.primitives import Sampler, Estimator
      from qiskit.algorithms.state_fidelities import ComputeUncompute
      from qiskit.opflow import PauliSumOp
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

      h2_op = PauliSumOp(SparsePauliOp(
          ["II", "IZ", "ZI", "ZZ", "XX"],
          coeffs=[
              -1.052373245772859,
              0.39793742484318045,
              -0.39793742484318045,
              -0.01128010425623538,
              0.18093119978423156,
          ],
      ))

      estimator = Estimator()
      ansatz = TwoLocal(rotation_blocks=["ry", "rz"], entanglement_blocks="cz")
      optimizer = SLSQP()
      fidelity = ComputeUncompute(Sampler())

      vqd = VQD(estimator, fidelity, ansatz, optimizer, k=2)
      result = vqd.compute_eigenvalues(h2_op)
      eigenvalues = result.eigenvalues

  Note that the evaluated auxillary operators are now obtained via the
  ``aux_operators_evaluated`` field on the results. This will consist of a list or dict of
  tuples containing the expectation values for these operators, as we well as the metadata from
  primitive run. ``aux_operator_eigenvalues`` is no longer a valid field.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-fidelity-interface-primitives-dc543d079ecaa8dd.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added new algorithms to calculate state fidelities/overlaps
  for pairs of quantum circuits (that can be parametrized). Apart from
  the base class (:class:`~qiskit.algorithms.state_fidelities.BaseStateFidelity`) which defines the interface,
  there is an implementation of the compute-uncompute method that leverages
  instances of the :class:`~.BaseSampler` primitive: :class:`qiskit.algorithms.state_fidelities.ComputeUncompute`.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
    from qiskit.algorithms.state_fidelities import ComputeUncompute
    from qiskit.circuit.library import RealAmplitudes

    sampler = Sampler(...)
    fidelity = ComputeUncompute(sampler)
    circuit = RealAmplitudes(2)
    values = np.random.random(circuit.num_parameters)
    shift = np.ones_like(values) * 0.01

    job = fidelity.run([circuit], [circuit], [values], [values+shift])
    fidelities = job.result().fidelities

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-gradients-with-primitives-561cf9cf75a7ccb8.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new module :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.gradients` that contains
  classes which are used to compute gradients using the primitive
  interfaces defined in :mod:`qiskit.primitives`. There are 4 types of
  gradient classes: Finite Difference, Parameter Shift, Linear
  Combination of Unitary, and SPSA with implementations that either use
  an instance of the :class:`~.BaseEstimator` interface:

    * :class:`~.ParamShiftEstimatorGradient`
    * :class:`~.LinCombEstimatorGradient`
    * :class:`~.FiniteDiffEstimatorGradient`
    * :class:`~.SPSAEstimatorGradient`

  or an instance of the :class:`~.BaseSampler` interface:

    * :class:`~.ParamShiftSamplerGradient`
    * :class:`~.LinCombSamplerGradient`
    * :class:`~.FiniteDiffSamplerGradient`
    * :class:`~.SPSASamplerGradient`

  The estimator-based gradients compute the gradient of expectation
  values, while the sampler-based gradients return gradients of the
  measurement outcomes (also referred to as "probability gradients").

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      estimator = Estimator(...)
      gradient = ParamShiftEstimatorGradient(estimator)
      job = gradient.run(circuits, observables, parameters)
      gradients = job.result().gradients

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-grover-primitives-10f81efdba93703d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.Grover` class has a new keyword argument, ``sampler`` which is
  used to run the algorithm using an instance of the :class:`~.BaseSampler`
  interface to calculate the results. This new argument supersedes the
  the ``quantum_instance`` argument and accordingly, ``quantum_instance``
  is pending deprecation and will be deprecated and subsequently removed in
  future releases.

  Example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
      from qiskit.algorithms import Grover, AmplificationProblem

      sampler = Sampler()
      oracle = QuantumCircuit(2)
      oracle.cz(0, 1)
      problem = AmplificationProblem(oracle, is_good_state=["11"])
      grover = Grover(sampler=sampler)
      result = grover.amplify(problem)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-pulse-drawer-option-936b6d943de9a270.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- A new option, ``"formatter.control.fill_waveform"`` has been added to
  the pulse drawer (:func:`.pulse_v2.draw` and :meth:`.Schedule.draw`)
  style sheets. This option can be used to remove the face color of pulses
  in the output visualization which allows for drawing pulses only with
  lines.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.visualization.pulse_v2 import IQXStandard

      my_style = IQXStandard(
          **{"formatter.control.fill_waveform": False, "formatter.line_width.fill_waveform": 2}
      )

      my_sched.draw(style=my_style)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-reset-simplification-pass-82377d80dd0081fd.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new transpiler pass, :class:`~.ResetAfterMeasureSimplification`,
  which is used to replace a :class:`~.Reset` operation after a
  :class:`~.Measure` with a conditional :class:`~.XGate`. This pass can
  be used on backends where a :class:`~.Reset` operation is performed by
  doing a measurement and then a conditional X gate so that this will
  remove the duplicate implicit :class:`~.Measure` from the :class:`~.Reset`
  operation. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ResetAfterMeasureSimplification

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
      qc.measure_all()
      qc.reset(0)
      qc.draw('mpl')

  .. jupyter-execute::

      result = ResetAfterMeasureSimplification()(qc)
      result.draw('mpl')

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-reverse-linear-entanglement-nlocal-38581e4ffb7a7c68.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new supported value, ``"reverse_linear"`` for the ``entanglement`` keyword argument
  to the constructor for the :class:`~.NLocal` circuit class. For :class:`~.TwoLocal` circuits
  (which are subclassess of :class:`~.NLocal`), if ``entanglement_blocks="cx"`` then
  using ``entanglement="reverse_linear"`` provides an equivalent  n-qubit circuit as
  ``entanglement="full"`` but with only :math:`n-1` :class:`~.CXGate` gates, instead of
  :math:`\frac{n(n-1)}{2}`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-schedule-block-reference-mechanism-8a7811e17b4fead3.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :class:`.ScheduleBlock` has been updated so that it can manage unassigned subroutine,
  in other words, to allow lazy calling of other programs.
  For example, this enables the following workflow:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import pulse

    with pulse.build() as prog:
      pulse.reference("x", "q0")

    with pulse.build() as xq0:
      pulse.play(Gaussian(160, 0.1, 40), pulse.DriveChannel(0))

    prog.assign_references({("x", "q0"): xq0})

  Now a user can create ``prog`` without knowing actual implementation of
  the reference ``("x", "q0")``, and assign it at a later time for execution.
  This improves modularity of pulse programs, and thus one can easily write a template
  pulse program relying on other calibrations.

  To realize this feature, the new pulse instruction (compiler directive)
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Reference` has been added.
  This instruction is injected into the current builder scope when
  the :func:`~qiskit.pulse.builder.reference` command is used.
  All references defined in the current pulse program can be listed with
  the :attr:`~qiskit.pulse.schedule.ScheduleBlock.references` property.

  In addition, every reference is managed with a scope to ease parameter management.
  :meth:`~.scoped_parameters` and :meth:`~.search_parameters` have been added to
  :class:`~.ScheduleBlock`. See API documentation for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-sparsepauliop-methods-00a7e6cc7055e1d0.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new method :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.argsort`, which
  returns the composition of permutations in the order of sorting
  by coefficient and sorting by Pauli. By using the ``weight``
  keyword argument for the method the output can additionally be sorted
  by the number of non-identity terms in the Pauli, where the set of
  all Paulis of a given weight are still ordered lexicographically.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-sparsepauliop-methods-00a7e6cc7055e1d0.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new method :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.sort`, which will first
  sort the coefficients using numpy's ``argsort()`` and then sort
  by Pauli, where the Pauli sort takes precedence. If the Pauli sort
  is the same, it will then be sorted by coefficient. By using the
  ``weight`` keyword argument the output can additionally  be sorted
  by the number of non-identity terms in the Pauli, where the set of
  all Paulis of a given weight are still ordered lexicographically.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-wire-order-to-drawers-657cb54e365c621a.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new keyword argument, ``wire_order``, to the :func:`~.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method which allows arbitrarily
  reordering both the quantum and classical bits in the output visualization.
  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

      qr = QuantumRegister(4, "q")
      cr = ClassicalRegister(4, "c")
      cr2 = ClassicalRegister(2, "ca")
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(qr, cr, cr2)
      circuit.h(0)
      circuit.h(3)
      circuit.x(1)
      circuit.x(3).c_if(cr, 10)
      circuit.draw('mpl', cregbundle=False, wire_order=[2, 1, 3, 0, 6, 8, 9, 5, 4, 7])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add_cnot_dihedral_class_cs_ccz_gates-6bd567daf3a467bd.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added support for the :class:`~.CSGate`, :class:`~.CSdgGate` and
  :class:`~.CCZGate` classes to the constructor for the operator
  class :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.CNOTDihedral`. The input
  circuits when creating a :class:`~.CNOTDihedral` operator will now
  support circuits using these gates. For example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.quantum_info import CNOTDihedral

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
      qc.t(0)
      qc.cs(0, 1)
      qc.tdg(0)
      operator = CNOTDihedral(qc)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/ae-algorithms-primitives-497bae1b2b04f877.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The amplitude estimation algorithm classes:

   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.AmplitudeEstimation`,
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.FasterAmplitudeEstimation`,
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.IterativeAmplitudeEstimation`,
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.MaximumLikelihoodAmplitudeEstimation`

  Now have a new keyword argument, ``sampler`` on their constructor that
  takes an instance of an object that implements the :class:`~.BaseSampler`
  interface including :class:`~.BackendSampler`, :class:`Sampler`, or any
  provider implementations such as those as those present in
  qiskit-ibm-runtime and qiskit-aer. This provides an alternative to using
  the ``quantum_instance`` argument to set the target :class:`~.Backend`
  or :class:`~.QuantumInstance` to run the algorithm on.
  Using a :class:`~.QuantumInstance` is pending deprecation and will
  be deprecated in a future release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/backend-converter-05360f12f9042829.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new class, :class:`~.BackendV2Converter`, which is used to wrap
  a :class:`~.BackendV1` instance in a :class:`~.BackendV2` interface. It
  enables you to have a :class:`~.BackendV2` instance from any
  :class:`~.BackendV1`. This enables standardizing access patterns on the
  newer :class:`~.BackendV2` interface even if you still support
  :class:`~.BackendV1`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/backend-converter-05360f12f9042829.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new function :func:`~.convert_to_target` which is used to take
  a :class:`~.BackendConfiguration`, and optionally a
  :class:`~.BackendProperties` and :class:`~.PulseDefaults` and create
  a :class:`~.Target` object equivalent to the contents of those objects.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/base-operators-sums-d331e78a9fa4b5d8.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- ``qiskit.quantum_info.BaseOperator`` subclasses (such as :class:`.ScalarOp`,
  :class:`.SparsePauliOp` and :class:`.PauliList`) can now be used with
  the built-in Python ``sum()`` function.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/c_if-to-if_else-converter-2d48046de31814a8.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- A new transpiler pass, :class:`.ConvertConditionsToIfOps` was added, which
  can be used to convert old-style :meth:`.Instruction.c_if`-conditioned
  instructions into :class:`.IfElseOp` objects.  This is to help ease the transition
  from the old type to the new type for backends.  For most users, there is no
  need to add this to your pass managers, and it is not included in any preset
  pass managers.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/commutative-inverse-cancellation-a10e72d8e42ac74b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Refactored gate commutativity analysis into a class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.CommutationChecker`.
  This class allows you to check (based on matrix multiplication) whether two gates commute or do not commute,
  and to cache the results (so that a similar check in the future will no longer require matrix
  multiplication).

  For example we can now do::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumRegister, CommutationChecker

      comm_checker = CommutationChecker()
      qr = QuantumRegister(4)

      res = comm_checker.commute(CXGate(), [qr[1], qr[0]], [], CXGate(), [qr[1], qr[2]], [])

  As the two CX gates commute (the first CX gate is over qubits ``qr[1]`` and ``qr[0]``, and the
  second CX gate is over qubits ``qr[1]`` and ``qr[2]``), we will have that ``res`` is ``True``.

  This commutativity checking is over-conservative for conditional and parameterized gates,
  and may return ``False`` even when such gates commute.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/commutative-inverse-cancellation-a10e72d8e42ac74b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.CommutativeInverseCancellation` that cancels pairs of
  inverse gates exploiting commutation relations between gates. This pass is a generalization
  of the transpiler pass :class:`.InverseCancellation` as it detects a larger set of inverse
  gates, and as it takes commutativity into account. The pass also avoids some problems
  associated with the transpiler pass :class:`.CommutativeCancellation`.

  For example::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import CommutativeInverseCancellation

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.z(0)
      circuit.x(1)
      circuit.cx(0, 1)
      circuit.z(0)
      circuit.x(1)

      passmanager = PassManager(CommutativeInverseCancellation())
      new_circuit = passmanager.run(circuit)

  cancels the pair of self-inverse `Z`-gates, and the pair of self-inverse `X`-gates (as the
  relevant gates commute with the `CX`-gate), producing a circuit consisting of a single `CX`-gate.

  The inverse checking is over-conservative for conditional and parameterized gates,
  and may not cancel some of such gates.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/compose-meas-no-meas-492ce91167d54154.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.compose` will now accept an operand with classical
  bits if the base circuit has none itself. The pattern of composing a
  circuit with measurements onto a quantum-only circuit is
  now valid. For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    base = QuantumCircuit(3)
    terminus = QuantumCircuit(3, 3)
    terminus.measure_all()

    # This will now succeed, though it was previously a CircuitError.
    base.compose(terminus)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/control-flow-depth-size-b598a4eb9d8888eb.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`.DAGCircuit` methods :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.depth` and
  :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.size` have a new ``recurse`` keyword argument for use with
  circuits that contain control-flow operations (such as :class:`~.IfElseOp`,
  :class:`~.WhileLoopOp`, and :class:`~.ForLoopOp`). By default this is ``False``
  and will raise an error if control-flow operations are present, to avoid poorly
  defined results.  If set to ``True``, a proxy value that attempts to fairly weigh
  each control-flow block relative to its condition is returned, even though the
  depth or size of a concrete run is generally unknowable. See each method's
  documentation for how each control-flow operation affects the output.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/control-flow-depth-size-b598a4eb9d8888eb.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :meth:`.DAGCircuit.count_ops` gained a ``recurse`` keyword argument for
  recursing into control-flow blocks.  By default this is ``True``, and all
  operations in all blocks will be returned, as well as the control-flow
  operations themselves.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/dag_dependency_speedup-f6298348cb3d8746.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added an argument ``create_preds_and_succs`` to the functions
  :func:`~qiskit.converters.circuit_to_dagdependency` and
  :func:`~qiskit.converters.dag_to_dagdependency`
  that convert from :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`, respectively, to
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency`.
  When the value of ``create_preds_and_succs`` is False, the transitive
  predecessors and successors for nodes in :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency`
  are not constructed, making the conversions faster and significantly less
  memory-intensive. The direct predecessors and successors for nodes in
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` are constructed as usual.

  For example::

      from qiskit.converters import circuit_to_dagdependency
      from qiskit import QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister, QuantumCircuit

      circuit_in = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit_in.h(qr[0])
      circuit_in.h(qr[1])

      dag_dependency = circuit_to_dagdependency(circuit_in, create_preds_and_succs=False)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/deprecate-stabilizer-table-9efd08c7de1a5b4d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added new attributes :attr:`.Clifford.symplectic_matrix`, :attr:`.Clifford.tableau`,
  :attr:`.Clifford.z`, :attr:`.Clifford.x`, :attr:`.Clifford.phase`,
  :attr:`.Clifford.stab`, :attr:`.Clifford.stab_z`, :attr:`.Clifford.stab_x`, :attr:`.Clifford.stab_phase`,
  :attr:`.Clifford.destab`, :attr:`.Clifford.destab_z`, :attr:`.Clifford.destab_x`, :attr:`.Clifford.destab_phase`
  to the :class:`~.Clifford` class. These can be used instead of :attr:`.Clifford.table`, that will be deprecated in the future.
  :class:`.StabilizerTable` and :class:`.PauliTable` are pending deprecation and
  will be deprecated in the future release and subsequently removed after that.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/edge-coloring-e55700fcf8902c79.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`.Commuting2qGateRouter` constructor now has a new keyword
  argument, ``edge_coloring``. This argument is used to provide an edge
  coloring of the coupling map to determine the order in which the
  commuting gates are applied.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/evolution-framework-primitives-c86779b5d0dffd25.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new algorithms interface for creating time evolution algorithms
  using the primitives :class:`~.BaseSampler` and :class:`~.BaseEstimator`.
  This new interface consists of:

   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.TimeEvolutionProblem`
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.TimeEvolutionResult`
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.ImaginaryTimeEvolver`
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.RealTimeEvolver`

  This new interface is an alternative to the previously existing time
  evolution algorithms interface available defined with
  :class:`~.EvolutionProblem`, :class:`~.EvolutionResult`,
  :class:`~.RealEvolver`, and :class:`~.ImaginaryEvolver` which worked
  with a :class:`~.QuantumInstance` object instead of primitives. This
  new interface supersedes the previous interface which will eventually
  be deprecated and subsequently removed in future releases.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fake_auckland-deadbeef.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added new backend classes to :mod:`qiskit.providers.fake_provider`:

   * :class:`~.FakeAuckland`
   * :class:`~.FakeOslo`
   * :class:`~.FakeGeneva`
   * :class:`~.FakePerth`

  These new classes implement the :class:`~.BackendV2` interface and
  are created using stored snapshots of the backend information from the
  IBM Quantum systems ``ibm_auckland``, ``ibm_oslo``, ``ibm_geneva``, and
  ``ibm_perth`` systems respectively.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/implements_two_step_tapering-f481a8cac3990cd5.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.Z2Symmetries` class has two new methods,
  :meth:`~.Z2Symmetries.convert_clifford` and
  :meth:`~.Z2Symmetries.taper_clifford`. These two methods are the two
  operations necessary for taperng an operator based on the Z2 symmetries
  in the object and were previously performed internally via the
  :meth:`~.Z2Symmetries.taper` method. However, these methods are now
  public methods of the class which can be called individually if needed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/improve-basepauli-evolve-clifford-d714b2eee475334b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The runtime performance for conjugation of a long :class:`.PauliList`
  object by a :class:`.Clifford` using the  :meth:`.PauliList.evolve`
  has significantly improved. It will now run significantly faster than
  before.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/introduce-classical-io-channel-0a616e6ca75b7687.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new abstract class :class:`~.ClassicalIOChannel` to the
  :mod:`qiskit.pulse.channels` module. This class is used to represent
  classical I/O channels and differentiate these channels from other
  subclasses of :class:`~qiskit.pulse.channels.Channel`. This new class is
  the base class for the :class:`~.MemorySlot`, :class:`~.RegisterSlot`,
  and :class:`~.SnapshotChannel` classes. Accordingly, the
  :func:`~qiskit.pulse.transforms.pad` canonicalization pulse transform in
  :mod:`qiskit.pulse.transforms` will not introduce delays to any instances
  of :class:`~.ClassicalIOChannel`

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/multiple-parallel-rusty-sabres-32bc93f79ae48a1f.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.SabreSwap` transpiler pass has a new keyword argument on its
  constructor, ``trials``. The ``trials`` argument is used to specify the
  number of random seed trials to attempt. The output from the
  `SABRE algorithm <https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02573>`__  can differ greatly
  based on the seed used for the random number. :class:`~.SabreSwap` will
  now run the algorithm with ``trials`` number of random seeds and pick the
  best (with the fewest swaps inserted). If ``trials`` is not specified the
  pass will default to use the number of physical CPUs on the local system.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/multiple-parallel-rusty-sabres-32bc93f79ae48a1f.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.SabreLayout` transpiler pass has a new keyword argument on
  its constructor, ``swap_trials``. The ``swap_trials`` argument is used
  to specify how many random seed trials to run on the :class:`~.SabreSwap`
  pass internally. It corresponds to the ``trials`` arugment on the
  :class:`~.SabreSwap` pass. When set, each iteration of
  :class:`~.SabreSwap` will be run internally ``swap_trials`` times.
  If ``swap_trials`` is not specified the will default to use
  the number of physical CPUs on the local system.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/observable-eval-primitives-e1fd989e15c7760c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new function, :func:`~.estimate_observables` which uses an
  implementation of the :class:`~.BaseEstimator` interface (e.g.
  :class:`~.Estimator`, :class:`~.BackendEstimator`, or any provider
  implementations such as those as those present in ``qiskit-ibm-runtime``
  and ``qiskit-aer``) to calculate the expectation values, their means and
  standard deviations from a list or dictionary of observables. This
  serves a similar purpose to the pre-existing function
  :func:`~.eval_observables` which performed the calculation using
  a :class:`~.QuantumInstance` object and has been superseded (and will be
  deprecated and subsequently removed in future releases) by this
  new function.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/operation-abstract-base-class-c5efe020aa9caf46.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new :class:`.Operation` base class which provides a lightweight abstract interface
  for objects that can be put on :class:`.QuantumCircuit`. This allows to store "higher-level"
  objects directly on a circuit (for instance, :class:`.Clifford` objects), to directly combine such objects
  (for instance, to compose several consecutive :class:`.Clifford` objects over the same qubits), and
  to synthesize such objects at run time (for instance, to synthesize :class:`.Clifford` in
  a way that optimizes depth and/or exploits device connectivity).
  Previously, only subclasses of :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction` could be put on
  :class:`.QuantumCircuit`, but this interface has become unwieldy and includes too many methods
  and attributes for general-purpose objects.

  The new :class:`.Operation` interface includes ``name``, ``num_qubits`` and ``num_clbits``
  (in the future this may be slightly adjusted), but importantly does not include ``definition``
  (and thus does not tie synthesis to the object), does not include ``condition``
  (this should be part of separate classical control flow), and does not include ``duration`` and
  ``unit`` (as these are properties of the output of the transpiler).

  As of now, :class:`.Operation` includes :class:`.Gate`, :class:`.Reset`, :class:`.Barrier`,
  :class:`.Measure`, and "higher-level" objects such as :class:`.Clifford`. This list of
  "higher-level" objects will grow in the future.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/operation-abstract-base-class-c5efe020aa9caf46.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- A :class:`.Clifford` is now added to a quantum circuit as an :class:`.Operation`, without first
  synthesizing a subcircuit implementing this Clifford. The actual synthesis is postponed
  to a later :class:`.HighLevelSynthesis` transpilation pass.

  For example, the following code::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.quantum_info import random_clifford

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      cliff = random_clifford(2)
      qc.append(cliff, [0, 1])

  no longer converts ``cliff`` to :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction`, which includes
  synthesizing the clifford into a circuit, when it is appended to ``qc``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/operation-abstract-base-class-c5efe020aa9caf46.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.OptimizeCliffords` that collects blocks of consecutive
  :class:`.Clifford` objects in a circuit, and replaces each block with a single :class:`.Clifford`.

  For example, the following code::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.quantum_info import random_clifford
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import OptimizeCliffords
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      cliff1 = random_clifford(2)
      cliff2 = random_clifford(2)
      qc.append(cliff1, [2, 1])
      qc.append(cliff2, [2, 1])
      qc_optimized = PassManager(OptimizeCliffords()).run(qc)

  first stores the two Cliffords ``cliff1`` and ``cliff2`` on ``qc`` as "higher-level" objects,
  and then the transpiler pass :class:`.OptimizeCliffords` optimizes the circuit by composing
  these two Cliffords into a single Clifford. Note that the resulting Clifford is still stored
  on ``qc`` as a higher-level object. This pass is not yet included in any of preset pass
  managers.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/operation-abstract-base-class-c5efe020aa9caf46.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.HighLevelSynthesis` that synthesizes higher-level objects
  (for instance, :class:`.Clifford` objects).

  For example, the following code::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.quantum_info import random_clifford
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import HighLevelSynthesis

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      qc.h(0)
      cliff = random_clifford(2)
      qc.append(cliff, [0, 1])

      qc_synthesized = PassManager(HighLevelSynthesis()).run(qc)

  will synthesize the higher-level Clifford stored in ``qc`` using the default
  :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.decompose_clifford` function.

  This new transpiler pass :class:`.HighLevelSynthesis` is integrated into the preset pass managers,
  running right after :class:`.UnitarySynthesis` pass. Thus, :func:`.transpile` will
  synthesize all higher-level Cliffords present in the circuit.

  It is important to note that the work done to store :class:`.Clifford` objects as "higher-level"
  objects and to transpile these objects using :class:`.HighLevelSynthesis` pass should be completely
  transparent, and no code changes are required.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/operator-parameters-c81b7c05bffb740b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :class:`.SparsePauliOp`\ s can now be constructed with coefficient arrays
  that are general Python objects.  This is intended for use with
  :class:`.ParameterExpression` objects; other objects may work, but do not
  have first-class support. Some :class:`.SparsePauliOp` methods (such as
  conversion to other class representations) may not work when using
  ``object`` arrays, if the desired target cannot represent these general
  arrays.

  For example, a :class:`.ParameterExpression` :class:`.SparsePauliOp` could
  be constructed by::

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

      print(SparsePauliOp(["II", "XZ"], np.array([Parameter("a"), Parameter("b")])))

  which gives

  .. code-block:: text

      SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XZ'],
            coeffs=[ParameterExpression(1.0*a), ParameterExpression(1.0*b)])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/plot-hist-797bfaeea2156c53.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new function :func:`~.plot_distribution` for plotting distributions over quasi-probabilities.
  This is suitable for ``Counts``, ``QuasiDistribution`` and ``ProbDistribution``.
  Raw `dict` can be passed as well. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.visualization import plot_distribution

      quasi_dist = {'0': .98, '1': -.01}
      plot_distribution(quasi_dist)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/pluggable-high-level-synthesis-3af9976b22e012d9.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Introduced a new high level synthesis plugin interface which is used to enable
  using alternative synthesis techniques included in external packages
  seamlessly with the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.HighLevelSynthesis`
  transpiler pass. These alternative synthesis techniques can be specified for
  any "higher-level" objects of type :class:`~.Operation`, as for example for
  :class:`~.Clifford` and :class:`~.LinearFunction` objects. This plugin interface
  is similar to the one for unitary synthesis. In the latter case, the details on writing
  a new plugin appear in the :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.plugin` module documentation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/pluggable-high-level-synthesis-3af9976b22e012d9.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Introduced a new class :class:`~.HLSConfig` which can be used to specify alternative synthesis
  algorithms for "higher-level" objects of type :class:`~.Operation`.
  For each higher-level object of interest, an object :class:`~.HLSConfig` specifies a list of
  synthesis methods and their arguments.
  This object can be passed to :class:`.HighLevelSynthesis` transpiler pass or specified
  as a parameter ``hls_config`` in :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`.

  As an example, let us assume that ``op_a`` and ``op_b`` are names of two higher-level objects,
  that ``op_a``-objects have two synthesis methods ``default`` which does require any additional
  parameters and ``other`` with two optional integer parameters ``option_1`` and ``option_2``,
  that ``op_b``-objects have a single synthesis method ``default``, and ``qc`` is a quantum
  circuit containing ``op_a`` and ``op_b`` objects. The following code snippet::

      hls_config = HLSConfig(op_b=[("other", {"option_1": 7, "option_2": 4})])
      pm = PassManager([HighLevelSynthesis(hls_config=hls_config)])
      transpiled_qc = pm.run(qc)

  shows how to run the alternative synthesis method ``other`` for ``op_b``-objects, while using the
  ``default`` methods for all other high-level objects, including ``op_a``-objects.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/primitive-run-5d1afab3655330a6.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added new methods for executing primitives: :meth:`.BaseSampler.run` and :meth:`.BaseEstimator.run`.
  These methods execute asynchronously and return :class:`.JobV1` objects which
  provide a handle to the exections. These new run methods can be passed :class:`~.QuantumCircuit`
  objects (and observables for :class:`~.BaseEstimator`) that are not registered in the constructor.
  For example::

      estimator = Estimator()
      result = estimator.run(circuits, observables, parameter_values).result()

  This provides an alternative to the previous execution model (which is now deprecated) for the
  :class:`~.BaseSampler` and :class:`~.BaseEstimator` primitives which would take all the inputs via
  the constructor and calling the primitive object with the combination of those input parameters
  to use in the execution.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/primitive-shots-option-ed320872d048483e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added ``shots`` option for reference implementations of primitives.
  Random numbers can be fixed by giving ``seed_primitive``. For example::

    from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    bell = QuantumCircuit(2)
    bell.h(0)
    bell.cx(0, 1)
    bell.measure_all()

    with Sampler(circuits=[bell]) as sampler:
        result = sampler(circuits=[0], shots=1024, seed_primitive=15)
        print([q.binary_probabilities() for q in result.quasi_dists])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/primitives-run_options-eb4a360c3f1e197d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The constructors for the :class:`~.BaseSampler` and
  :class:`~.BaseEstimator` primitive classes have a new optional keyword
  argument, ``options`` which is used to set the default values for the
  options exposed via the :attr:`~.BaseSampler.options` attribute.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/project-dynamics-primitives-6003336d0866ca19.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added the :class:`~.PVQD` class to the time evolution framework in :mod:`qiskit.algorithms`.
  This class implements the projected Variational Quantum Dynamics (p-VQD) algorithm
  `Barison et al. <https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2021-07-28-512/>`_.

  In each timestep this algorithm computes the next state with a Trotter formula and projects it
  onto a variational form. The projection is determined by maximizing the fidelity of the
  Trotter-evolved state and the ansatz, using a classical optimization routine.

  .. code-block:: python

      import numpy as np

      from qiskit.algorithms.state_fidelities import ComputeUncompute
      from qiskit.algorithms.evolvers import EvolutionProblem
      from qiskit.algorithms.time_evolvers.pvqd import PVQD
      from qiskit.primitives import Estimator, Sampler
      from qiskit import BasicAer
      from qiskit.circuit.library import EfficientSU2
      from qiskit.quantum_info import Pauli, SparsePauliOp
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import L_BFGS_B

      sampler = Sampler()
      fidelity = ComputeUncompute(sampler)
      estimator = Estimator()
      hamiltonian = 0.1 * SparsePauliOp([Pauli("ZZ"), Pauli("IX"), Pauli("XI")])
      observable = Pauli("ZZ")
      ansatz = EfficientSU2(2, reps=1)
      initial_parameters = np.zeros(ansatz.num_parameters)

      time = 1
      optimizer = L_BFGS_B()

      # setup the algorithm
      pvqd = PVQD(
          fidelity,
          ansatz,
          initial_parameters,
          estimator,
          num_timesteps=100,
          optimizer=optimizer,
      )

      # specify the evolution problem
      problem = EvolutionProblem(
          hamiltonian, time, aux_operators=[hamiltonian, observable]
      )

      # and evolve!
      result = pvqd.evolve(problem)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/qnspsa-primitification-29a9dcae055bf2b4.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :meth:`.QNSPSA.get_fidelity` static method now supports an optional
  ``sampler`` argument which is used to provide an implementation of the
  :class:`~.BaseSampler` interface (such as :class:`~.Sampler`,
  :class:`~.BackendSampler`, or any provider implementations such as those
  present in ``qiskit-ibm-runtime`` and ``qiskit-aer``) to compute the
  fidelity of a :class:`~.QuantumCircuit`. For example::

    from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
    from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import QNSPSA

    fidelity = QNSPSA.get_fidelity(my_circuit, Sampler())

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/qpe-algorithms-primitives-3605bdfa5ab1bfef.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new keyword argument ``sampler`` to the constructors of the
  phase estimation classes:

   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.IterativePhaseEstimation`
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.PhaseEstimation`
   * :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.HamiltonianPhaseEstimation`

  This argument is used to provide an implementation of the
  :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BaseSampler` interface such as :class:`~.Sampler`,
  :class:`~.BackendSampler`, or any provider implementations such as those
  as those present in ``qiskit-ibm-runtime`` and ``qiskit-aer``.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
    from qiskit.algorithms.phase_estimators import HamiltonianPhaseEstimation
    from qiskit.synthesis import MatrixExponential
    from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
    from qiskit.opflow import PauliSumOp


    sampler = Sampler()
    num_evaluation_qubits = 6
    phase_est = HamiltonianPhaseEstimation(
        num_evaluation_qubits=num_evaluation_qubits, sampler=sampler
    )

    hamiltonian = PauliSumOp(SparsePauliOp.from_list([("X", 0.5), ("Y", 0.6), ("I", 0.7)]))
    result = phase_est.estimate(
        hamiltonian=hamiltonian,
        state_preparation=None,
        evolution=MatrixExponential(),
        bound=1.05,
    )

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/rabre-rwap-ae51631bec7450df.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.SabreSwap` transpiler pass has significantly improved
  runtime performance due to a rewrite of the algorithm in Rust.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove-symbolic-pulse-subclasses-77314a1654521852.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Symbolic pulse subclasses :class:`.Gaussian`, :class:`.GaussianSquare`,
  :class:`.Drag` and :class:`.Constant` have been upgraded to
  instantiate :class:`SymbolicPulse` rather than the subclass itself.
  All parametric pulse objects in pulse programs must be symbolic pulse instances,
  because subclassing is no longer neccesary. Note that :class:`SymbolicPulse` can
  uniquely identify a particular envelope with the symbolic expression object
  defined in :attr:`SymbolicPulse.envelope`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/sampled_expval-85e300e0fb5fa5ea.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new function, :func:`~.sampled_expectation_value`, that allows
  for computing expectation values for diagonal operators from
  distributions such as :class:`~.Counts` and :class:`~.QuasiDistribution`.
  Valid operators for use with this function are: ``str``, :class:`~.Pauli`,
  :class:`~.PauliOp`, :class:`~.PauliSumOp`, and
  :class:`~.SparsePauliOp`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/sampling-vqe-and-qaoa-ecfb36a0a300f69b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- A :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers.SamplingVQE` class is introduced, which is
  optimized for diagonal hamiltonians and leverages a ``sampler`` primitive. A
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers.QAOA` class is also added that subclasses
  ``SamplingVQE``.

  To use the new ``SamplingVQE`` with a reference primitive, one can do, for example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers import SamplingVQE
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SLSQP
      from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
      from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
      from qiskit.opflow import PauliSumOp
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

      operator = PauliSumOp(SparsePauliOp(["ZZ", "IZ", "II"], coeffs=[1, -0.5, 0.12]))

      sampler = Sampler()
      ansatz = TwoLocal(rotation_blocks=["ry", "rz"], entanglement_blocks="cz")
      optimizer = SLSQP()

      sampling_vqe = SamplingVQE(sampler, ansatz, optimizer)
      result = sampling_vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(operator)
      eigenvalue = result.eigenvalue

  Note that the evaluated auxillary operators are now obtained via the
  ``aux_operators_evaluated`` field on the results. This will consist of a list or dict of
  tuples containing the expectation values for these operators, as we well as the metadata from
  primitive run. ``aux_operator_eigenvalues`` is no longer a valid field.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/sparse-pauli-equiv-atol-58f5dfe7f39b70ee.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new ``atol`` keyword argument to the :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.equiv`
  method to adjust to tolerance of the equivalence check,

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/stage-plugin-interface-47daae40f7d0ad3c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Introduced a new plugin interface for transpiler stages which is used to
  enable alternative :class:`~.PassManager` objects from an external package
  in a particular stage as part of :func:`~.transpile` or the
  :class:`~.StagedPassManager` output from
  :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager`, :func:`~.level_0_pass_manager`,
  :func:`~.level_1_pass_manager`, :func:`~.level_2_pass_manager`, and
  :func:`~.level_3_pass_manager`. Users can select a plugin to use for a
  transpiler stage with the ``init_method``, ``layout_method``,
  ``routing_method``, ``translation_method``, ``optimization_method``, and
  ``scheduling_method`` keyword arguments on :func:`~.transpile` and
  :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager`. A full list of plugin names
  currently installed can be found with the :func:`.list_stage_plugins`
  function. For creating plugins refer to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.plugin` module documentation
  which includes a guide for writing stage plugins.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/stage-plugin-interface-47daae40f7d0ad3c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :func:`~.transpile` has two new keyword arguments, ``init_method`` and
  ``optimization_method`` which are used to specify alternative plugins to
  use for the ``init`` stage and ``optimization`` stages respectively.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/stage-plugin-interface-47daae40f7d0ad3c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.PassManagerConfig` class has 2 new attributes,
  :attr:`~.PassManagerConfig.init_method` and
  :attr:`~.PassManagerConfig.optimization_method`
  along with matching keyword arguments on the constructor methods. These represent
  the user specified ``init`` and ``optimization`` plugins to use for
  compilation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/steppable-optimizers-9d9b48ba78bd58bb.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`~.SteppableOptimizer` class is added. It allows one to perfore classical
  optimizations step-by-step using the :meth:`~.SteppableOptimizer.step` method. These
  optimizers implement the "ask and tell" interface which (optionally) allows to manually compute
  the required function or gradient evaluations and plug them back into the optimizer.
  For more information about this interface see: `ask and tell interface
  <https://optuna.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/20_recipes/009_ask_and_tell.html>`_.
  A very simple use case when the user might want to do the optimization step by step is for
  readout:

  .. code-block:: python

          import random
          import numpy as np
          from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import GradientDescent

          def objective(x):
                return (np.linalg.norm(x) - 1) ** 2

          def grad(x):
                return 2 * (np.linalg.norm(x) - 1) * x / np.linalg.norm(x)


          initial_point = np.random.normal(0, 1, size=(100,))

          optimizer = GradientDescent(maxiter=20)
          optimizer.start(x0=initial_point, fun=objective, jac=grad)

          for _ in range(maxiter):
              state = optimizer.state
              # Here you can manually read out anything from the optimizer state.
              optimizer.step()

          result = optimizer.create_result()

  A more complex case would be error handling. Imagine that the function you are evaluating has
  a random chance of failing. In this case you can catch the error and run the function again
  until it yields the desired result before continuing the optimization process. In this case
  one would use the ask and tell interface.

  .. code-block:: python

          import random
          import numpy as np
          from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import GradientDescent

          def objective(x):
              if random.choice([True, False]):
                  return None
              else:
                  return (np.linalg.norm(x) - 1) ** 2

          def grad(x):
              if random.choice([True, False]):
                  return None
              else:
                  return 2 * (np.linalg.norm(x) - 1) * x / np.linalg.norm(x)


          initial_point = np.random.normal(0, 1, size=(100,))

          optimizer = GradientDescent(maxiter=20)
          optimizer.start(x0=initial_point, fun=objective, jac=grad)

          while optimizer.continue_condition():
              ask_data = optimizer.ask()
              evaluated_gradient = None

              while evaluated_gradient is None:
                  evaluated_gradient = grad(ask_data.x_center)
                  optimizer.state.njev += 1

              optmizer.state.nit += 1

              cf  = TellData(eval_jac=evaluated_gradient)
              optimizer.tell(ask_data=ask_data, tell_data=tell_data)

          result = optimizer.create_result()

  Transitioned :class:`GradientDescent` to be a subclass of :class:`.SteppableOptimizer`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/tensored-subset-fitter-bd28e6e6ec5bdaae.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The ``subset_fitter`` method is added to the :class:`.TensoredMeasFitter`
  class. The implementation is restricted to mitigation patterns in which each
  qubit is mitigated individually, e.g. ``[[0], [1], [2]]``. This is, however,
  the most widely used case. It allows the :class:`.TensoredMeasFitter` to
  be used in cases where the numberical order of the physical qubits does not
  match the index of the classical bit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/transpiler-control-flow-708896bfdb51961d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Control-flow operations are now supported through the transpiler at
  optimization levels 0 and 1 (e.g. calling :func:`.transpile` or
  :func:`.generate_preset_pass_manager` with keyword argument
  ``optimization_level=1``).  One can now construct a circuit such as

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 1)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.measure(0, 0)
    with qc.if_test((0, True)) as else_:
      qc.x(1)
    with else_:
      qc.y(1)

  and successfully transpile this, such as by::

    from qiskit import transpile
    from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator

    backend = AerSimulator(method="statevector")
    transpiled = transpile(qc, backend)

  The available values for the keyword argument ``layout_method`` are
  "trivial" and "dense".  For ``routing_method``, "stochastic" and "none" are
  available.  Translation (``translation_method``) can be done using
  "translator" or "unroller".  Optimization levels 2 and 3 are not yet
  supported with control flow, nor is circuit scheduling (i.e. providing a
  value to ``scheduling_method``), though we intend to expand support for
  these, and the other layout, routing and translation methods in subsequent
  releases of Qiskit Terra.

  In order for transpilation with control-flow operations to succeed with a
  backend, the backend must have the requisite control-flow operations in its
  stated basis.  Qiskit Aer, for example, does this.  If you simply want to try
  out such transpilations, consider overriding the ``basis_gates`` argument
  to :func:`.transpile`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/transpiler-control-flow-708896bfdb51961d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The following transpiler passes have all been taught to understand
  control-flow constructs in the form of :class:`.ControlFlowOp` instructions
  in a circuit:

  .. rubric:: Layout-related

  - :class:`.ApplyLayout`
  - :class:`.DenseLayout`
  - :class:`.EnlargeWithAncilla`
  - :class:`.FullAncillaAllocation`
  - :class:`.SetLayout`
  - :class:`.TrivialLayout`
  - :class:`.VF2Layout`
  - :class:`.VF2PostLayout`

  .. rubric:: Routing-related

  - :class:`.CheckGateDirection`
  - :class:`.CheckMap`
  - :class:`.GateDirection`
  - :class:`.StochasticSwap`

  .. rubric:: Translation-related

  - :class:`.BasisTranslator`
  - :class:`.ContainsInstruction`
  - :class:`.GatesInBasis`
  - :class:`.UnitarySynthesis`
  - :class:`.Unroll3qOrMore`
  - :class:`.UnrollCustomDefinitions`
  - :class:`.Unroller`

  .. rubric:: Optimization-related

  - :class:`.BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements`
  - :class:`.Depth`
  - :class:`.FixedPoint`
  - :class:`.Size`
  - :class:`.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`
  - :class:`.CXCancellation`
  - :class:`.RemoveResetInZeroState`

  These passes are most commonly used via the preset pass managers (those used
  internally by :func:`.transpile` and :func:`.generate_preset_pass_manager`),
  but are also available for other uses.  These passes will now recurse into
  control-flow operations where appropriate, updating or analysing the
  internal blocks.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/trotter-qrte-primitives-8b3e495738b57fc3.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a new :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.time_evolvers.trotterization.TrotterQRTE` class
  that implements the :class:`~.RealTimeEvolver` interface that uses an
  :class:`qiskit.primitives.BaseEstimator` to perform the calculation. This
  new class supersedes the previously available :class:`qiskit.algorithms.TrotterQRTE`
  class (which will be deprecated and subsequenty removed in future releases) that used
  a :class:`~.Backend` or :class:`~QuantumInstance` to perform the calculation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/update-DAGCircuit.substitute_node_with_dag-3a44d16b1a82df41.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :meth:`.DAGCircuit.substitute_node_with_dag` now takes ``propagate_condition``
  as a keyword argument.  This defaults to ``True``, which was the previous
  behavior, and copies any condition on the node to be replaced onto every
  operation node in the replacement.  If set to ``False``, the condition will
  not be copied, which allows replacement of a conditional node with a sub-DAG
  that already faithfully implements the condition.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/update-DAGCircuit.substitute_node_with_dag-3a44d16b1a82df41.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :meth:`.DAGCircuit.substitute_node_with_dag` can now take a mapping for its
  ``wires`` parameter as well as a sequence.  The mapping should map bits in
  the replacement DAG to the bits in the DAG it is being inserted into.  This
  permits an easier style of construction for callers when the input node has
  both classical bits and a condition, and the replacement DAG may use these
  out-of-order.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/vqe-with-estimator-primitive-7cbcc462ad4dc593.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added the :class:`qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers` package to include interfaces for
  primitive-enabled algorithms. :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers.VQE` has been
  refactored in this implementation to leverage primitives.

  To use the new implementation with a reference primitive, one can do, for example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms.minimum_eigensolvers import VQE
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SLSQP
      from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
      from qiskit.primitives import Estimator
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

      h2_op = SparsePauliOp(
          ["II", "IZ", "ZI", "ZZ", "XX"],
          coeffs=[
              -1.052373245772859,
              0.39793742484318045,
              -0.39793742484318045,
              -0.01128010425623538,
              0.18093119978423156,
          ],
      )

      estimator = Estimator()
      ansatz = TwoLocal(rotation_blocks=["ry", "rz"], entanglement_blocks="cz")
      optimizer = SLSQP()

      vqe = VQE(estimator, ansatz, optimizer)
      result = vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(h2_op)
      eigenvalue = result.eigenvalue

  Note that the evaluated auxillary operators are now obtained via the
  ``aux_operators_evaluated`` field on the results. This will consist of a list or dict of
  tuples containing the expectation values for these operators, as we well as the metadata from
  primitive run. ``aux_operator_eigenvalues`` is no longer a valid field.

.. _Release Notes_0.22.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-target-control-flow-representation-09520e2838f0657e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- For :class:`~.Target` objects that only contain globally defined 2 qubit
  operations without any connectivity constaints the return from the
  :meth:`.Target.build_coupling_map` method will now return ``None`` instead
  of a :class:`~.CouplingMap` object that contains ``num_qubits`` nodes
  and no edges. This change was made to better reflect the actual
  connectivity constraints of the :class:`~.Target` because in this case
  there are no connectivity constraints on the backend being modeled by
  the :class:`~.Target`, not a lack of connecitvity. If you desire the
  previous behavior for any reason you can reproduce it by checking for a
  ``None`` return and manually building a coupling map, for example::

      from qiskit.transpiler import Target, CouplingMap
      from qiskit.circuit.library import CXGate

      target = Target(num_qubits=3)
      target.add_instruction(CXGate())
      cmap = target.build_coupling_map()
      if cmap is None:
          cmap = CouplingMap()
          for i in range(target.num_qubits):
              cmap.add_physical_qubit(i)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-reverse-linear-entanglement-nlocal-38581e4ffb7a7c68.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The default value for the ``entanglement`` keyword argument on the constructor for the
  :class:`~.RealAmplitudes` and :class:`~.EfficientSU2` classes has changed from ``"full"`` to
  ``"reverse_linear"``. This change was made because the output circuit is equivalent but
  uses only :math:`n-1` instead of :math:`\frac{n(n-1)}{2}` :class:`~.CXGate` gates. If you
  desire the previous default you can explicity set ``entanglement="full"`` when calling either
  constructor.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-sampler-error-check-38426fb186db44d4.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Added a validation check to :meth:`.BaseSampler.run`.
  It raises an error if there is no classical bit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/add-schedule-block-reference-mechanism-8a7811e17b4fead3.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Behavior of the :func:`~qiskit.pulse.builder.call` pulse builder function has been upgraded.
  When a :class:`.ScheduleBlock` instance is called by this method, it internally creates
  a :class:`.Reference` in the current context, and immediately assigns the called program to
  the reference. Thus, the :class:`.Call` instruction is no longer generated.
  Along with this change, it is prohibited to call different blocks with the same ``name``
  argument. Such operation will result in an error.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/begin-tweedledum-removal-25bb68fc72804f00.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- For most architectures starting in the following release of Qiskit Terra,
  0.23, the ``tweedledum`` package will become an optional dependency, instead
  of a requirement.  This is currently used by some classical phase-oracle
  functions.  If your application or library needs this functionality, you may
  want to prepare by adding ``tweedledum`` to your package's dependencies
  immediately.

  ``tweedledum`` is no longer a requirement on macOS arm64 (M1) with immediate
  effect in Qiskit Terra 0.22.  This is because the provided wheels for this
  platform are broken, and building from the sdist is not reliable for most
  people.  If you manually install a working version of ``tweedledum``, all
  the dependent functionality will continue to work.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-Opertor.from_circuit-transpile-5c056968ee40025e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The ``._layout`` attribute of the :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` object has
  been changed from storing a :class:`~.Layout` object to storing a
  data class with 2 attributes, ``initial_layout`` which contains a
  :class:`~.Layout` object for the initial layout set during compilation
  and ``input_qubit_mapping`` which contains a dictionary mapping qubits
  to position indices in the original circuit. This change was necessary to
  provide all the information for a post-transpiled circuit to be able to
  fully reverse the permutation caused by initial layout in all situations. While
  this attribute is private and shouldn't be used externally, it is
  the only way to track the initial layout through :func:`~.transpile`
  so the change is being documented in case you're relying on it. If
  you have a use case for the ``_layout`` attribute that is not being
  addressed by the Qiskit API please open an issue so we can address this
  feature gap.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/introduce-classical-io-channel-0a616e6ca75b7687.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The constructors for the :class:`~.SetPhase`, :class:`~.ShiftPhase`,
  :class:`~.SetFrequency`, and :class:`~.ShiftFrequency` classes will now
  raise a :class:`~.PulseError` if the value passed in via the ``channel``
  argument is not an instance of :class:`~.PulseChannel`. This change was
  made to validate the input to the constructors are valid as the
  instructions are only valid for pulse channels and not other types of
  channels.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/plot-hist-797bfaeea2156c53.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :func:`~.plot_histogram` function has been modified to return an actual
  histogram of discrete binned values. The previous behavior for the function
  was despite the name to actually generate a visualization of the distribution
  of the input. Due to this disparity between the name of the function and the behavior
  the function behavior was changed so it's actually generating a proper histogram
  of discrete data now. If you wish to preserve the previous behavior of plotting a
  probability distribution of the counts data you can leverage the :func:`~.plot_distribution` to generate an
  equivalent graph. For example, the previous behavior of
  ``plot_histogram({'00': 512, '11': 500})`` can be re-created with:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.visualization import plot_distribution
      import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

      ax = plt.subplot()
      plot_distribution({'00': 512, '11': 500}, ax=ax)
      ax.set_ylabel('Probabilities')

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/qiskit.pulse.builder-ddefe88dca5765b9.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The ``qiskit.pulse.builder`` contexts ``inline`` and ``pad`` have been
  removed.  These were first deprecated in Terra 0.18.0 (July 2021).  There is
  no replacement for ``inline``; one can simply write the pulses in the
  containing scope.  The ``pad`` context manager has had no effect since it
  was deprecated.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/rabre-rwap-ae51631bec7450df.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The output from the :class:`~.SabreSwap` transpiler pass (including when
  ``optimization_level=3`` or ``routing_method`` or ``layout_method`` are
  set to ``'sabre'`` when calling :func:`~.transpile`) with a fixed
  seed value may change from previous releases. This is caused by a new
  random number generator being used as part of the rewrite of the
  :class:`~.SabreSwap` pass in Rust which significantly improved the
  performance. If you rely on having consistent output you can run
  the pass in an earlier version of Qiskit and leverage :mod:`qiskit.qpy`
  to save the circuit and then load it using the current version.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/register-add-fix-e29fa2ee47aa6d05.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :meth:`.Layout.add` behavior when not specifying a ``physical_bit``
  has changed from previous releases. In previous releases, a new physical
  bit would be added based on the length of the :class:`~.Layout` object. For
  example if you had a :class:`~.Layout` with the physical bits 1 and 3
  successive calls to :meth:`~.Layout.add` would add physical bits 2, 4, 5, 6,
  etc. While if the physical bits were 2 and 3 then successive calls would
  add 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. This has changed so that instead :meth:`.Layout.add`
  will first add any missing physical bits between 0 and the max physical bit
  contained in the :class:`~.Layout`. So for the 1 and 3 example it now
  adds 0, 2, 4, 5 and for the 2 and 3 example it adds 0, 1, 4, 5 to the
  :class:`~.Layout`. This change was made for both increased predictability
  of the outcome, and also to fix a class of bugs caused by the unexpected
  behavior. As physical bits on a backend always are contiguous sequences from
  0 to :math:`n` adding new bits when there are still unused physical bits
  could potentially cause the layout to use more bits than available on the
  backend. If you desire the previous behavior, you can specify the desired
  physical bit manually when calling :meth:`.Layout.add`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove-deprecated-methods-in-pauli-c874d463ba1f7a0e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The deprecated method ``SparsePauliOp.table`` attribute has been removed.
  It was originally deprecated in Qiskit Terra 0.19. Instead the
  :meth:`~.SparsePauliOp.paulis` method should be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove-deprecated-methods-in-pauli-c874d463ba1f7a0e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Support for returning a :class:`~.PauliTable` from the
  :func:`~.pauli_basis` function has been removed. Similarly, the
  ``pauli_list`` argument on the :func:`~.pauli_basis` function which was
  used to switch to a :class:`~.PauliList` (now the only return type) has
  been removed. This functionality was deprecated in the Qiskit Terra 0.19 release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove-pulse-defs-old-20q-4ed46085b4a15678.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The fake backend objects :class:`~.FakeJohannesburg`,
  :class:`~.FakeJohannesburgV2`, :class:`~.FakeAlmaden`,
  :class:`~.FakeAlmadenV2`, :class:`~.FakeSingapore`, and
  :class:`~.FakeSingaporeV2` no longer contain the pulse defaults payloads.
  This means for the :class:`~.BackendV1` based classes the
  :meth:`.BackendV1.defaults` method and pulse simulation via
  :meth:`.BackendV1.run` is no longer available. For :class:`~.BackendV2`
  based classes the :attr:`~InstructionProperties.calibration` property for
  instructions in the :class:`~.Target` is no longer populated. This
  change was done because these systems had exceedingly large pulse defaults
  payloads (in total ~50MB) due to using sampled waveforms instead of
  parameteric pulse definitions. These three payload files took > 50% of the
  disk space required to install qiskit-terra. When weighed against the
  potential value of being able to compile with pulse awareness or pulse
  simulate these retired devices the file size is not worth the cost. If
  you require to leverage these properties you can leverage an older version
  of Qiskit and leverage :mod:`~qiskit.qpy` to transfer circuits from
  older versions of qiskit into the current release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove-symbolic-pulse-subclasses-77314a1654521852.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- ``isinstance`` check with pulse classes :class:`.Gaussian`, :class:`.GaussianSquare`,
  :class:`.Drag` and :class:`.Constant` will be invalidated because
  these pulse subclasses are no longer instantiated.  They will still work in Terra 0.22,
  but you should begin transitioning immediately.
  Instead of using type information, :attr:`SymbolicPulse.pulse_type` should be used.
  This is assumed to be a unique string identifer for pulse envelopes,
  and we can use string equality to investigate the pulse types. For example,

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.pulse.library import Gaussian

    pulse = Gaussian(160, 0.1, 40)

    if isinstance(pulse, Gaussian):
      print("This is Gaussian pulse.")

  This code should be upgraded to

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.pulse.library import Gaussian

    pulse = Gaussian(160, 0.1, 40)

    if pulse.pulse_type == "Gaussian":
      print("This is Gaussian pulse.")

  With the same reason, the class attributes such as ``pulse.__class__.__name__``
  should not be accessed to get pulse type information.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove_QiskitIndexError-098fa04f0afe440b.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The exception ``qiskit.exceptions.QiskitIndexError`` has been
  removed and no longer exists as per the deprecation notice from qiskit-terra
  0.18.0 (released on Jul 12, 2021).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/remove_optimizers_L_BFGS_B_epsilon-03f997aff50c394c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The deprecated arguments ``epsilon`` and ``factr`` for the constructor of
  the  :class:`~.L_BFGS_B` optimizer class have been removed. These arguments
  were originally deprecated as part of the 0.18.0 release (released on
  July 12, 2021). Instead the ``ftol`` argument should be used, you
  can refer to the `scipy docs <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/optimize.minimize-lbfgsb.html.>`__
  on the optimizer for more detail on the relationship between these arguments.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/sabres-for-everyone-3148ccf2064ccb0d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The preset pass managers for levels 1 and 2, which will be used when
  ``optimization_level=1`` or ``optimization_level=2`` with
  :func:`~.transpile` or :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager` and output
  from :func:`~.level_1_pass_manager` and :func:`~.level_2_pass_manager`,
  will now use :class:`~.SabreLayout` and :class:`~SabreSwap` by default
  instead of the previous defaults :class:`~.DenseLayout` and
  :class:`~.StochasticSwap`. This change was made to improve the output
  quality of the transpiler, the :class:`~.SabreLayout` and
  :class:`~SabreSwap` combination typically results in fewer
  :class:`~.SwapGate` objects being inserted into the output circuit.
  If you would like to use the previous default passes you can set
  ``layout_method='dense'`` and ``routing_method='stochastic'`` on
  :func:`~.transpile` or :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager` to
  leverage :class:`~.DenseLayout` and :class:`~.StochasticSwap` respectively.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/turn-off-approx-degree-df3d39eb69f7f09f.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The implicit use of ``approximation_degree!=1.0`` by default in
  in the :func:`~.transpile` function when ``optimization_level=3`` is set has been disabled.  The transpiler should, by default,
  preserve unitarity of the input up to known transformations such as one-sided permutations
  and similarity transformations.  This was broken by the previous use of ``approximation_degree=None``
  leading to incorrect results in cases such as Trotterized evolution with many time steps where
  unitaries were being overly approximated leading to incorrect results.  It was decided that
  transformations that break unitary equivalence should be explicitly activated by the user.
  If you desire the previous default behavior where synthesized :class:`~UnitaryGate` instructions
  are approximated up to the error rates of the target backend's native instructions you can explicitly
  set ``approximation_degree=None`` when calling :func:`~.transpile` with ``optimization_level=3``, for
  example::

      transpile(circuit, backend, approximation_degree=None, optimization_level=3)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/update-bfgs-optimizer-29b4ffa6724fbf38.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Change the default of maximum number of allowed function evaluations (``maxfun``) in
  :class:`.L_BFGS_B` from 1000 to 15000 to match the SciPy default.
  This number also matches the default number of iterations (``maxiter``).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/update-prob-quasi-2044285a46219d14.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Updated :class:`~qiskit.result.ProbDistribution` and :class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution`
  to store the information of the number of bits if bitstrings without prefix "0b" are given.
  :meth:`.ProbDistribution.binary_probabilities` and
  :meth:`.QuasiDistribution.binary_probabilities` use the stored number of bits
  as the default value of the number of bits.

  .. code-block: python

    import qiskit.result import ProbDistribution, QuasiDistribution

    prob = ProbDistribution({"00": 0.5, "01": 0.5})
    quasi = QuasiDistribution({"00": 0.5, "01": 0.5})

    print(prob.binary_probabilities())
    # {'00': 0.5, '01': 0.5}

    print(quasi.binary_probabilities())
    # {'00': 0.5, '01': 0.5}

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/upgrade_rzx_builder_skip_direct_cx-d0beff9b2b86ab8d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :class:`.RZXCalibrationBuilder` and :class:`.RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho`
  have been upgraded to skip stretching CX gates implemented by
  non-echoed cross resonance (ECR) sequence to avoid termination of the pass
  with unexpected errors.
  These passes take new argument ``verbose`` that controls whether the passes
  warn when this occurs. If ``verbose=True`` is set, pass raises user warning
  when it enconters non-ECR sequence.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/visualization-reorganisation-9e302239705c7842.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The visualization module :mod:`qiskit.visualization` has seen some internal
  reorganisation.  This should not have affected the public interface, but if
  you were accessing any internals of the circuit drawers, they may now be in
  different places.  The only parts of the visualization module that are
  considered public are the components that are documented in this online
  documentation.


.. _Release Notes_0.22.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/begin-tweedledum-removal-25bb68fc72804f00.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Importing the names ``Int1``, ``Int2``, ``classical_function`` and
  ``BooleanExpression`` directly from :mod:`qiskit.circuit` is deprecated.
  This is part of the move to make ``tweedledum`` an optional dependency rather
  than a full requirement.  Instead, you should import these names from
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/deprecate-linear-solvers-factorizers-bbf5302484cb6831.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Modules :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.factorizers` and
  :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.linear_solvers` are deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release.
  They are replaced by tutorials in the Qiskit Textbook:
  `Shor <https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-algorithms/shor.html>`__
  `HHL <https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-applications/hhl_tutorial.html>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/deprecate-stabilizer-table-9efd08c7de1a5b4d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :func:`.random_stabilizer_table` has been deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. Instead the :func:`~.random_pauli_list` function should be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/deprecated-pulse-deprecator-394ec75079441cda.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The pulse-module function ``qiskit.pulse.utils.deprecated_functionality`` is
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release.  This was a primarily
  internal-only function.  The same functionality is supplied by
  ``qiskit.utils.deprecate_function``, which should be used instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/primitive-run-5d1afab3655330a6.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The method of executing primitives has been changed.
  The :meth:`.BaseSampler.__call__` and
  :meth:`.BaseEstimator.__call__` methods were deprecated.
  For example::

    estimator = Estimator(...)
    result = estimator(circuits, observables, parameters)

    sampler = Sampler(...)
    result = sampler(circuits, observables, parameters)

  should be rewritten as

  .. code-block:: python

    estimator = Estimator()
    result = estimator.run(circuits, observables, parameter_values).result()

    sampler = Sampler()
    result = sampler.run(circuits, parameter_values).result()

  Using primitives as context managers is deprecated.
  Not all primitives have a context manager available. When available (e.g. in ``qiskit-ibm-runtime``),
  the session's context manager provides equivalent functionality.

  ``circuits``, ``observables``, and ``parameters`` in the constructor was deprecated.
  ``circuits`` and ``observables`` can be passed from ``run`` methods.
  ``run`` methods do not support ``parameters``. Users need to resort parameter values by themselves.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/upgrade_rzx_builder_skip_direct_cx-d0beff9b2b86ab8d.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The unused argument ``qubit_channel_mapping`` in the
  :class:`.RZXCalibrationBuilder` and :class:`.RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho`
  transpiler passes have been deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. This argument is no longer used and has no effect on the
  operation of the passes.

.. _Release Notes_0.22.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix_8438-159e67ecb6765d08.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue where :meth:`.Pauli.evolve` and :meth:`.PauliList.evolve` would
  raise a dtype error when evolving by certain Clifford gates which
  modified the Pauli's phase.
  Fixed `#8438 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8438>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/circuit-initialize-and-prepare-single-qubit-e25dacc8f873bc01.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed a bug in :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.initialize` and :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.prepare_state`
  that caused them to not accept a single :class:`Qubit` as argument to initialize.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/condition-in-while-loop-d6be0d6d6a1429da.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The method :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.while_loop` will now resolve classical bit
  references in its condition in the same way that :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.if_test`
  and :meth:`.InstructionSet.c_if` do.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/control-flow-depth-size-b598a4eb9d8888eb.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`.DAGCircuit` methods :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.depth`,
  :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.size` and :meth:`.DAGCircuit.count_ops` would previously
  silently return results that had little-to-no meaning if control-flow was
  present in the circuit.  The :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.depth` and
  :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.size` methods will now correctly throw an error in these
  cases, but have a new ``recurse`` keyword argument to allow the calculation
  of a proxy value, while :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.count_ops` will by default
  recurse into the blocks and count the operations within them.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/denselayout-loose-bits-3e66011432bc6232.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`~.DenseLayout` transpiler pass where any
  loose :class:`~.Qubit` objects (i.e. not part of a :class:`~.QuantumRegister`)
  that were part of a :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` would not be included in the
  output :class:`~.Layout` that was generated by the pass.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-Opertor.from_circuit-transpile-5c056968ee40025e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :meth:`.Operator.from_circuit` constructor method has been updated
  so that it can handle the layout output from :func:`~.transpile` and
  correctly reverse the qubit permutation caused by layout in all cases.
  Previously, if your transpiled circuit used loose :class:`~.Qubit` objects,
  multiple :class:`~.QuantumRegister` objects, or a single
  :class:`~.QuantumRegister` with a name other than ``"q"`` the constructor
  would have failed to create an :class:`~.Operator` from the circuit.
  Fixed `#8800 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8800>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-decomp-1q-1c-84f369f9a897a5b7.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed a bug where decomposing an instruction with one qubit and one classical bit
  containing a single quantum gate failed. Now the following decomposes as expected::

      block = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      block.h(0)

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      circuit.append(block, [0], [0])

      decomposed = circuit.decompose()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-empty-string-pauli-list-init-4d978fb0eaf1bc70.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed initialization of empty symplectic matrix in :meth:`~.PauliList.from_symplectic` in :class:`~.PauliList` class
  For example::

      from qiskit.quantum_info.operators import PauliList

      x = np.array([], dtype=bool).reshape((1,0))
      z = np.array([], dtype=bool).reshape((1,0))
      pauli_list = PauliList.from_symplectic(x, z)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-flipping-cz-gate-fd08305ca12d9a79.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fix a problem in the :class:`~.GateDirection` transpiler pass for the
  :class:`~.CZGate`. The CZ gate is symmetric, so flipping the qubit
  arguments is allowed to match the directed coupling map.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-gradient-wrapper-2f9ab45941739044.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed issues with the :func:`.DerivativeBase.gradient_wrapper` method
  when reusing a circuit sampler between the calls and binding nested
  parameters.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-idle-wires-display-de0ecc60d4000ca0.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue in the ``mpl`` and ``latex`` circuit drawers, when
  setting the ``idle_wires`` option to False when there was
  a ``barrier`` in the circuit would cause the drawers to
  fail, has been fixed.
  Fixed `#8313 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8313>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-latex-split-filesystem-0c38a1ade2f36e85.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue in :func:`~.circuit_drawer` and :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw`
  with the ``latex`` method where an ``OSError`` would be raised on systems
  whose temporary directories (*e.g* ``/tmp``) are on a different
  filesystem than the working directory.
  Fixes `#8542 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8542>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-nested-flow-controllers-a2a5f03eed482fa2.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Nesting a :class:`.FlowController` inside another in a :class:`.PassManager`
  could previously cause some transpiler passes to become "forgotten" during
  transpilation, if the passes returned a new :class:`.DAGCircuit` rather than
  mutating their input.  Nested :class:`.FlowController`\ s will now affect
  the transpilation correctly.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-nondeterministic-dagcircuit-eq-7caa9041093c6e4c.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Comparing :class:`.QuantumCircuit` and :class:`.DAGCircuit`\ s for equality
  was previously non-deterministic if the circuits contained more than one
  register of the same type (*e.g.* two or more :class:`.QuantumRegister`\ s),
  sometimes returning ``False`` even if the registers were identical.  It will
  now correctly compare circuits with multiple registers.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-qasm2-identity-as-unitary-aa2feeb05707a597.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The OpenQASM 2 exporter (:meth:`.QuantumCircuit.qasm`) will now correctly
  define the qubit parameters for :class:`.UnitaryGate` operations that do
  not affect all the qubits they are defined over.
  Fixed `#8224 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8224>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-text-drawer-compression-a80a5636957e8eec.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- There were two bugs in the ``text`` circuit drawer that were fixed.
  These appeared when ``vertical_compression`` was set to ``medium``,
  which is the default. The first would sometimes cause text to overwrite
  other text or gates, and the second would sometimes cause the connections
  between a gate and its controls to break.
  See `#8588 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8588>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/fix-unitary-synth-1q-circuit-756ad4ed209a313f.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.UnitarySynthesis` pass where a circuit
  with 1 qubit gates and a :class:`~.Target` input would sometimes fail
  instead of processing the circuit as expected.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/gate-direction-target-a9f0acd0cf30ed66.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The :class:`.GateDirection` transpiler pass will now respect the available
  values for gate parameters when handling parametrised gates with a
  :class:`.Target`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/improve-error-message-snobfit-missing-bounds-748943a87e682d82.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`~.SNOBFIT` optimizer class when an
  internal error would be raised during the execution of the
  :meth:`~.SNOBFIT.minimize` method if no input bounds where specified.
  This is now checked at call time to quickly raise a ``ValueError`` if
  required bounds are missing from the :meth:`~.SNOBFIT.minimize` call.
  Fixes `#8580 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8580>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/make-use-of-callback-in-vqd-99e3c85f03181298.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue in the output callable from the
  :meth:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQD.get_energy_evaluation` method of
  the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQD` class will now correctly call
  the specified ``callback`` when run. Previously the callback would
  incorrectly not be used in this case.
  Fixed `#8575 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8575>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/no_warning_with_reverse_bits-b47cb1e357201593.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue when :func:`~circuit_drawer` was used with ``reverse_bits=True`` on a
  circuit without classical bits that would cause a potentially confusing warning about
  ``cregbundle`` to be emitted.
  Fixed `#8690 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8690>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/qasm3-fix-conditional-measurement-2d938cad74a9024a.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The OpenQASM 3 exporter (:mod:`qiskit.qasm3`) will now correctly handle
  OpenQASM built-ins (such as ``reset`` and ``measure``) that have a classical
  condition applied by :meth:`~.InstructionSet.c_if`.  Previously the condition
  would have been ignored.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/qiskit-nature-797-8f1b0975309b8756.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.SPSA` class where internally it was
  trying to batch jobs into even sized batches which would raise an
  exception if creating even batches was not possible. This has been fixed
  so it will always batch jobs successfully even if they're not evenly sized.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/register-add-fix-e29fa2ee47aa6d05.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed the behavior of :meth:`.Layout.add` which was potentially causing the
  output of :meth:`~.transpile` to be invalid and contain more Qubits than
  what was available on the target backend. Fixed:
  `#8667 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8667>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/rh1_state_to_latex_fix-e36e47cbdb25033e.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~.visualization.state_visualization.state_to_latex`
  function: passing a latex string to the optional ``prefix`` argument of the function
  would raise an error. Fixed `#8460 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8460>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/state_to_latex_for_none-da834de3811640ce.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- The function :func:`~qiskit.visualization.state_visualization.state_to_latex` produced not valid LaTeX in
  presence of close-to-zero values, resulting in errors when :func:`~qiskit.visualization.state_visualization.state_drawer` is called.
  Fixed `#8169 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8169>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/steppable-optimizers-9d9b48ba78bd58bb.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- :class:`.GradientDescent` will now correctly count the number of iterations, function evaluations and
  gradient evaluations. Also the documentation now correctly states that the gradient is approximated
  by a forward finite difference method.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.22/switched-to-StandardScaler-43d24a7918e96c14.yaml @ b'618770367f7a5a3a22fd43ea9fcfb7f17393eb6a'

- Fix deprecation warnings in :class:`.NaturalGradient`, which now uses the
  :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler` to scale the data
  before fitting the model if the ``normalize`` parameter is set to ``True``.

Aer 0.11.0
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.38.0
*************

Terra 0.21.2
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0:

Aer 0.11.0
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/prepare-0.11-63503170f57ab66d.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

The Qiskit Aer 0.11.0 release highlights are:

* The migration to a new self-contained Python namespace ``qiskit_aer``
* The introduction of the :class:`~.AerStatevector` class
* The introduction of Aer implementations of :mod:`~qiskit.primitives`,
  :class:`~qiskit_aer.primitives.Sampler` and :class:`~qiskit_aer.primitives.Estimator`
* Introduction of support for running with `cuQuantum <https://developer.nvidia.com/cuquantum-sdk>`__


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/add-backendv2-support-to-noise-model-78fe515040918793.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added support for :class:`~.BackendV2` to
  :meth:`~.NoiseModel.from_backend`.
  Now it can generate a :class:`~.NoiseModel` object from an
  input :class:`~.BackendV2` instance. When a :class:`~.BackendV2`
  input is used on :meth:`~.NoiseModel.from_backend` the two deprecated
  options, ``standard_gates`` and ``warnings``, are gracefully ignored.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/add-primitives-65bf67ea8f0c29b1.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added Aer implementation of :mod:`~qiskit.primitives`,
  :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primitives.Sampler` and :class:`~.qiskit_aer.primitives.Estimator.
  Thes implementations of the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BaseSampler` and
  :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BaseEstimator` interfaces leverage qiskit aer to
  efficiently perform the computation of the primitive operations. You can
  refer to the :mod:`qiskit.primitives` docs for a more detailed description
  of the primitives API.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/add_aer_runtime_library-6a0efd6a75a510b9.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added a shared library to Qiskit Aer that allows external programs to use
  Aer's simulation methods. This is an experimental feature and its API
  may be changed without the deprecation period.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/arm64-macos-wheels-3778e83a8d036168.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added support for M1 macOS systems. Precompiled binaries for supported
  Python versions >=3.8 on arm64 macOS will now be published on PyPI for this
  and future releases.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/cuQuantum-support-d33abe5b1cb778a8.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added support for cuQuantum, NVIDIA's APIs for quantum computing,
  to accelerate statevector, density matrix and unitary simulators
  by using GPUs.
  This is experiemental implementation for cuQuantum Beta 2. (0.1.0)
  cuStateVec APIs are enabled to accelerate instead of Aer's implementations
  by building Aer by setting path of cuQuantum to ``CUSTATEVEC_ROOT``.
  (binary distribution is not available currently.)
  cuStateVector is enabled by setting ``device='GPU'`` and
  ``cuStateVec_threshold`` options. cuStateVec is enabled when number of
  qubits of input circuit is equal or greater than ``cuStateVec_threshold``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/non-x86_ibm_cpu-493e51313ba222a6.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Added partial support for running on ppc64le and s390x Linux platforms.
  This release will start publishing pre-compiled binaries for ppc64le and
  s390x Linux platforms on all Python versions. However, unlike other
  supported platforms not all of Qiskit's upstream dependencies support these
  platforms yet. So a C/C++ compiler may be required to build and install
  these dependencies and a simple ``pip install qiskit-aer`` with just a
  working Python environment will not be sufficient to install Qiskit Aer.
  Additionally, these same constraints prevent us from testing the
  pre-compiled wheels before publishing them, so the same guarantees around
  platform support that exist for the other platforms don't apply to these
  platforms.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/support_initialize_with_label-bc08f29928d3e3f3.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Allow initialization with a label, that consists of ``+-rl``. Now the following
  code works:

  .. code-block:: python

      import qiskit
      from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator

      qc = qiskit.QuantumCircuit(4)
      qc.initialize('+-rl')
      qc.save_statevector()

      AerSimulator(method="statevector").run(qc)


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/non-x86_ibm_cpu-493e51313ba222a6.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- When running on Linux s390x platforms (or other big endian platforms)
  running circuits that contain :class:`~.UnitaryGate` operations will not
  work because of an endianess bug.
  See `#1506 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1506>`__ for more
  details.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/MPI-chunk-swap-optimization-8e693483ed271583.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- MPI parallelization for large number of qubits is optimized to apply
  multiple chunk-swaps as all-to-all communication that can decrease
  data size exchanged over MPI processes. This upgrade improve scalability
  of parallelization.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/change_default_fusion_parameters-cec337a003208e06.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Set default ``fusion_max_qubit`` and ``fusion_threshold`` depending on the configured
  ``method`` for :class:`~AerSimulator`. Previously, the default values of
  ``fusion_max_qubit`` and ``fusion_threshold`` were ``5`` and ``14`` respectively for
  all simulation methods. However, their optimal values depend on running methods. If you
  depended on the previous defaults you can explicitly set ``fusion_max_qubit=5`` or
  ``fusion_threshold=14`` to retain the previous default behavior. For example::

      from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator

      sim = AerSimulator(method='mps', fusion_max_qubit=5, fusion_threshold=14)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/cuQuantum_22.05.0.41_support-cb0e797b57d20c3a.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- This is update to support cuQuantum 22.5.0.41 including bug fix of
  thread safety in some cuStateVec APIs. Now Qiskit Aer turns on
  multi-threading for multi-shots and multi-chunk parallelization
  when enabling cuStateVec.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/drop-python36-61553302523fa240.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Running qiskit-aer with Python 3.6 is no longer supported. Python >= 3.7
  is now required to install and run qiskit-aer.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/new-namespace-9c3b9fd73ed504e6.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- The ``qiskit-aer`` Python package has moved to be a self-contained
  namespace, ``qiskit_aer``. Previously, it shared
  a namespace with ``qiskit-terra`` by being ``qiskit.providers.aer``.
  `This was problematic for several reasons <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/559>`__,
  and this release moves away from it. For the time being ``import qiskit.providers.aer``
  will continue to work and redirect to ``qiskit_aer`` automatically. Imports from the legacy
  ``qiskit.provider.aer`` namespace will emit a ``DeprecationWarning`` in the
  future. To avoid any potential issues starting with this release,
  updating all imports from ``qiskit.providers.aer`` to ``qiskit_aer`` and
  from ``qiskit.Aer`` to ``qiskit_aer.Aer`` is recommended.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/remove_snapsho_operations-a78f13f23c7743b6.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Removed snapshot instructions (such as ``SnapshotStatevector``) which were deprecated since 0.9.0.
  Applications that use these instructions need to be modified to use corresponding save
  instructions (such as :class:`.SaveStatevector`).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/remove_snapsho_operations-a78f13f23c7743b6.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Removed the ``qiskit_aer.extensions`` module completely.  With the removal of
  the snapshot instructions, this module has become empty and no longer serves
  a purpose.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/terra-version-bump-68eac37136428805.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- The required version of Qiskit Terra has been bumped to 0.20.0.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.11.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/MPI_chunk_fixes-1ea74548cd3c3515.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fixes for MPI chunk distribution. Including fix for global indexing
  for Thrust implementations, fix for cache blocking of non-gate operations.
  Also savestatevector returns same statevector to all processes
  (only 1st process received statevector previously.)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/allow_multiplexer_without_control_qubits-f5cb8bdbe6302e55.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Handles a multiplexer gate as a unitary gate if it has no control qubits.
  Previously, if a multiplexer gate does not have control qubits, quantum state
  was not updated.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/delay-pass-units-a31341568057fdb3.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fixes a bug in :class:`.RelaxationNoisePass` where instruction durations
  were always assumed to be in *dt* time units, regardless of the actual
  unit of the isntruction. Now unit conversion is correctly handled for
  all instruction duration units.

  See `#1453 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1453>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix-for-loop-no-parameter-aa5b04b1da0e956b.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fixed simulation of ``for`` loops where the loop parameter was not used in
  the body of the loop.  For example, previously this code would fail, but
  will now succeed:

  .. code-block:: python

      import qiskit
      from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator

      qc = qiskit.QuantumCircuit(2)
      with qc.for_loop(range(4)) as i:
          qc.h(0)
          qc.cx(0, 1)

      AerSimulator(method="statevector").run(qc)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix-invalid-t2-error-a3685e4a3ad0a1e7.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fixes a bug in ``NoiseModel.from_backend()`` that raised an error when
  T2 value greater than 2 * T1 was supplied by the backend.
  After this fix, it becomes to truncate T2 value up to 2 * T1 and
  issue a user warning if truncates.
  The bug was introduced at #1391 and, before that, ``NoiseModel.from_backend()`` had
  truncated the T2 value up to 2 * T1 silently.

  See `Issue 1464 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1464>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix-qerror-assemble-9919a93b210ca776.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fix performance regression in noisy simulations due to large increase in
  serialization overhead for loading noise models from Python into C++
  resulting from unintended nested Python multiprocessing calls.
  See `issue 1407 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1407>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix-seed-generation-MPI-ee1f0ad44e913d4f.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- This is the fix for Issue #1557. Different seed numbers are generated for
  each process if `seed_simulator` option is not set. This fix average seed
  set in Circuit for all processes to use the same seed number.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix_MPI_distribution-23cdf0d15258816f.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- This is a fix of MPI parallelization for multi-chunk parallelization and
  multi-shot distribution over parallel processes. There were missing
  distribution configuration that prevents MPI distribution, is now fixed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix_cacheblocking__multi_control_gates-f6a7fca4f3db2f61.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- This is fix for cache blocking transpiler and chunk parallelization for
  GPUs or MPI. This fix fixes issue with qubits which has many control or
  target qubits (> blocking_qubits). From this fix, only target qubits of
  the multi-controlled gate is cache blocked in blocking_qubits.
  But it does not support case if number of target qubits is still larger
  than blocking_qubits (i.e. large unitary matrix multiplication)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/fix_qerror_to_dict-13a7683ac4adddd4.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fixes a bug in :meth:`.QuantumError.to_dict` where N-qubit circuit
  instructions where the assembled instruction always applied to
  qubits ``[0, ..., N-1]`` rather than the instruction qubits. This
  bug also affected device and fake backend noise models.

  See `Issue 1415 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1415>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/make_random_seed_reproducible-a7abdfc09ec67bd8.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Because a seed was randomly assigned to each circuit if seed_simulator is not set,
  multi-circuit simulation was not reproducible with another multi-circuit simulation.
  Users needed to run multiple single-circuit simulation with the seed_simulator which
  is randomly assigned in the multi-circuit simulation. This fix allows users to reproduce
  multi-circuit simulation with another multi-circuit simulation by setting seed_simulator
  of the first circuit in the first multi-circuit simulation. This fix also resolve an
  issue reported in https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1511, where simulation
  with parameter-binds returns identical results for each circuit instance.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/multi-shots-pauli-noise-improvements-87637a02e81806cf.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- Fix performance issue in multi-shots batched optimization for GPU when
  using Pauli noise. This fix allows multi-threading to runtime noise
  sampling, and uses nested OpenMP parallelization when using multiple GPUs.
  This is fix for
  `issue 1473 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1473>`

.. releasenotes/notes/0.11/support_for_cuQuantum0.40-566391cc42be2341.yaml @ b'b7c4a322f8409fc2809b57b0701d1da6717c7efd'

- This is the fix for cuStateVec support, fix for build error
  because of specification change of some APIs of cuStateVec
  from cuQuantum version 0.40.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_bug_in_tail_while-6a9201d1ad6ba6e8.yaml @ b'44b8fbef5d2c353f880f2de94291c85154c0d687'

- Fixes an issue when while_loop is the tail of QuantumCircuit. while_loop
  is translated to jump and mark instructions. However, if a while_loop is
  at the end of a circuit, its mark instruction is truncated wrongly. This
  fix corrects the truncation algorithm to always remain mark instructions.




IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.37.2
*************

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.21.2:

Terra 0.21.2
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.21.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.21.2-71dd32f64f50e853.yaml @ b'fdb62bea1eac6822b96e8dcd2fe19e7aee10027e'

Qiskit Terra 0.21.2 is a primarily a bugfix release, and also comes with several improved documentation pages.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.21.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/backend_name_fix-175e12b5cf902f99.yaml @ b'fdb62bea1eac6822b96e8dcd2fe19e7aee10027e'

- ``aer_simulator_statevector_gpu`` will now be recognized correctly as statevector
  method in some function when using Qiskit Aer's GPU simulators in :class:`.QuantumInstance`
  and other algorithm runners.

.. releasenotes/notes/bugfix-ucgate-inverse-global_phase-c9655c13c22e5cf4.yaml @ b'fdb62bea1eac6822b96e8dcd2fe19e7aee10027e'

- Fixed the :meth:`.UCGate.inverse` method which previously did not invert the
  global phase.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-QuantumCircuit.compose-in-control-flow-scopes-a8aad3b87efbe77c.yaml @ b'5a65e507bb2203b75621bb6204aac852af2f587c'

- :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.compose` will now function correctly when used with
  the ``inplace=True`` argument within control-flow builder contexts.
  Previously the instructions would be added outside the control-flow scope.
  Fixed `#8433 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8433>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-paramexpr-isreal-8d20348b4ce6cbe7.yaml @ b'fdb62bea1eac6822b96e8dcd2fe19e7aee10027e'

- Fixed a bug where a bound :class:`.ParameterExpression` was not identified as real
  if ``symengine`` was installed and the bound expression was not a plain ``1j``.
  For example::

      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

      x = Parameter("x")
      expr = 1j * x
      bound = expr.bind({x: 2})
      print(bound.is_real())  # used to be True, but is now False

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qpy-controlledgate-open-control-35c8ccb4c7466f4c.yaml @ b'5e26264e39cf7deaebf2b03696b1bf2d3fb8117a'

- Fixed QPY serialisation and deserialisation of :class:`.ControlledGate`
  with open controls (*i.e.* those whose ``ctrl_state`` is not all ones).
  Fixed `#8549 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8549>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/support-channels-in--fake-backend-v2-82f0650006495fbe.yaml @ b'66c12f28a31159dab227fdf303306819b4a10909'

- All fake backends in :mod:`qiskit.providers.fake_provider.backends` have been
  updated to return the corresponding pulse channel objects with the method call of
  :meth:`~BackendV2.drive_channel`, :meth:`~BackendV2.measure_channel`,
  :meth:`~BackendV2.acquire_channel`, :meth:`~BackendV2.control_channel`.

.. releasenotes/notes/taper-performance-6da355c04da5b648.yaml @ b'fdb62bea1eac6822b96e8dcd2fe19e7aee10027e'

- Fixed support for running :meth:`.Z2Symmetries.taper` on larger problems.
  Previously, the method would require a large amount of memory which would
  typically cause failures for larger problem. As a side effect of this fix
  the performance has significantly improved.


Aer 0.10.4
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.37.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.21.1:

Terra 0.21.1
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.21.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/decompose-fix-993f7242eaa69407.yaml @ b'01a7aa6f9f8b8a87e2f149111c8fc78a14e7df8c'

- Fixed an issue in :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.decompose` method when passing in a list of ``Gate`` classes for the
  ``gates_to_decompose`` argument. If any gates in the circuit had a label set this argument wouldn't be handled
  correctly and caused the output decomposition to incorrectly skip gates explicitly in the ``gates_to_decompose``
  list.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-evolvedop-to-instruction-c90c4f1aa6b4232a.yaml @ b'664747a66e2199a4b20abb9b7180cccb12c61a3f'

- Fix :meth:`~.EvolvedOp.to_instruction` which previously tried to create a
  :class:`~.UnitaryGate` without exponentiating the operator to evolve.
  Since this operator is generally not unitary, this raised an error (and if
  the operator would have been unitary by chance, it would not have been the expected result).

  Now calling :meth:`~.EvolvedOp.to_instruction` correctly produces a gate
  that implements the time evolution of the operator it holds::

    >>> from qiskit.opflow import EvolvedOp, X
    >>> op = EvolvedOp(0.5 * X)
    >>> op.to_instruction()
    Instruction(
        name='unitary', num_qubits=1, num_clbits=0,
        params=[array([[0.87758256+0.j, 0.-0.47942554j], [0.-0.47942554j, 0.87758256+0.j]])]
    )

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-numpy-indices-marginal-dist-45889e49ba337d84.yaml @ b'1dd344442355e33777e178932f478c53bbd169b0'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~.marginal_distribution` function: when
  a numpy array was passed in for the ``indices`` argument the function would
  raise an error.
  Fixed `#8283 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8283>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-opflow-vector-to-circuit-fn-02cb3424269fa733.yaml @ b'd76e23ec0027e6c687f144c812c4401cc1288dcf'

- Previously it was not possible to adjoint a :class:`.CircuitStateFn` that has been
  constructed from a :class:`.VectorStateFn`. That's because the statevector has been
  converted to a circuit with the :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize` instruction, which
  is not unitary. This problem is now fixed by instead using the :class:`.StatePreparation`
  instruction, which can be used since the state is assumed to start out in the all 0 state.

  For example we can now do::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.opflow import StateFn

      left = StateFn([0, 1])
      left_circuit = left.to_circuit_op().primitive

      right_circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
      right_circuit.x(0)

      overlap = left_circuit.inverse().compose(right_circuit)  # this line raised an error before!

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-optimizer-settings-881585bfa8130cb7.yaml @ b'd54380fa7a078005081b81a10d5d989124a0be40'

- Fix a bug in the :class:`~.Optimizer` classes where re-constructing a new optimizer instance
  from a previously exisiting :attr:`~.Optimizer.settings` reset both the new and previous
  optimizer settings to the defaults. This notably led to a bug if :class:`~.Optimizer` objects
  were send as input to Qiskit Runtime programs.

  Now optimizer objects are correctly reconstructed::

    >>> from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import COBYLA
    >>> original = COBYLA(maxiter=1)
    >>> reconstructed = COBYLA(**original.settings)
    >>> reconstructed._options["maxiter"]
    1  # used to be 1000!

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-pulse-limit_amplitude-72b8b501710fe3aa.yaml @ b'01a7aa6f9f8b8a87e2f149111c8fc78a14e7df8c'

- Fixed an issue where the ``limit_amplitude`` argument on an individual
  :class:`~.SymbolicPulse` or :class:`~.Waveform` instance
  was not properly reflected by parameter validation. In addition, QPY
  schedule :func:`~qiskit.qpy.dump` has been fixed to correctly
  store the ``limit_amplitude`` value tied to the instance, rather than
  saving the global class variable.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-zzmap-pairwise-5653395849fec454.yaml @ b'01a7aa6f9f8b8a87e2f149111c8fc78a14e7df8c'

- Fix the pairwise entanglement structure for :class:`~.NLocal` circuits.
  This led to a bug in the :class:`~.ZZFeatureMap`, where using
  ``entanglement="pairwise"`` raised an error. Now it correctly produces the
  desired feature map::

    from qiskit.circuit.library import ZZFeatureMap
    encoding = ZZFeatureMap(4, entanglement="pairwise", reps=1)
    print(encoding.decompose().draw())

  The above prints:

  .. parsed-literal::

         
    q_0:  H  P(2.0*x[0]) 
         
    q_1:  H  P(2.0*x[1])  X  P(2.0*( - x[0])*( - x[1]))  X 
         
    q_2:  H  P(2.0*x[2])  X  P(2.0*( - x[1])*( - x[2]))  X 
         
    q_3:  H  P(2.0*x[3])  X  P(2.0*( - x[2])*( - x[3]))  X 
         

.. releasenotes/notes/global-phase-ucgate-cd61355e314a3e64.yaml @ b'01a7aa6f9f8b8a87e2f149111c8fc78a14e7df8c'

- Fixed an issue in handling the global phase of the :class:`~.UCGate` class.

Aer 0.10.4
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.37.0
*************

This release officially marks the end of support for the Qiskit Ignis project
from Qiskit. It was originally deprecated in the 0.33.0 release and as was
documented in that release the ``qiskit-ignis`` package has been removed from
the Qiskit metapackage, which means in that future release
``pip install qiskit`` will no longer include ``qiskit-ignis``. However, note
because of limitations in python packaging we cannot automatically remove a
pre-existing install of ``qiskit-ignis``. If you are upgrading from a previous
version it's recommended that you manually uninstall Qiskit Ignis with
``pip uninstall qiskit-ignis`` or install the metapackage
in a fresh python environment.

Qiskit Ignis has been supersceded by the `Qiskit Experiments <https://qiskit.org/documentation/experiments/>`__
project. You can refer to the `migration guide <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis#migration-guide>`__
for details on how to switch from Qiskit Ignis to Qiskit Experiments.

Terra 0.21.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.21.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/release-0.21.0-4a6c079c6301bde6.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

The Qiskit 0.21.0 release highlights are:

 * Support for serialization of a pulse :class:`~.ScheduleBlock` via
   :mod:`qiskit.qpy`. The :ref:`qpy_format` has been updated to version 5
   which includes a definition for including the pulse schedules.
   To support this, a new :class:`~.SymbolicPulse` class was introduced to
   enable defining parametric pulse waveforms via symbolic expressions.
 * Improvements to working with preset pass managers. A new function
   :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager` enables easily generating
   a pass manager equivalent to what :func:`~.transpile` will use internally.
   Additionally, preset pass managers are now instances of
   :class:`~.StagedPassManager` which makes it easier to modify sections.
 * A refactor of the internal data structure of the
   :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.data` attribute. It previously was a list of
   tuples in the form ``(instruction, qubits, clbits)`` and now is a list of
   :class:`~.CircuitInstruction` objects. The :class:`~.CircuitInstruction`
   objects is backwards compatible with the previous tuple based access,
   however with runtime overhead cost.

Additionally, the transpiler has been improved to enable better quality
outputs. This includes the introduction of new passes such as
:class:`~.VF2PostLayout` and :class:`~.ToqmSwap`.

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-full-passmanager-5a377f1b71480f72.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new class, :class:`qiskit.transpiler.StagedPassManager`, which is
  a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` subclass that has a pipeline
  with defined phases to perform circuit compilation. Each phase is a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` object that will get executed
  in a fixed order. For example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import *
    from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, StagedPassManager

    basis_gates = ['rx', 'ry', 'rxx']
    init = PassManager([UnitarySynthesis(basis_gates, min_qubits=3), Unroll3qOrMore()])
    translate = PassManager([Collect2qBlocks(),
                             ConsolidateBlocks(basis_gates=basis_gates),
                             UnitarySynthesis(basis_gates)])

    staged_pm = StagedPassManager(stages=['init', 'translation'], init=init, translation=translate)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-group-commuting-method-in-PauliList-and-SparsePauliOp-5dec2877c4a97861.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added the methods :meth:`.PauliList.group_commuting` and :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.group_commuting`,
  which partition these operators into sublists where each element commutes with all the others.
  For example::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import PauliList, SparsePauliOp

    groups = PauliList(["XX", "YY", "IZ", "ZZ"]).group_commuting()
    # 'groups' is [PauliList(['IZ', 'ZZ']), PauliList(['XX', 'YY'])]

    op = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("XX", 2), ("YY", 1), ("IZ", 2j), ("ZZ", 1j)])
    groups = op.group_commuting()
    # 'groups' is [
    #     SparsePauliOp(['IZ', 'ZZ'], coeffs=[0.+2.j, 0.+1.j]),
    #     SparsePauliOp(['XX', 'YY'], coeffs=[2.+0.j, 1.+0.j]),
    # ]

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-marginal-distribution-21060de506ed9cfc.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new function, :func:`~.marginal_distribution`, which is used to
  marginalize an input dictionary of bitstrings to an integer (such as
  :class:`~.Counts`). This is similar in functionality to the existing
  :func:`~.marginal_counts` function with three key differences. The first
  is that :func:`~.marginal_counts` works with either a counts dictionary
  or a :class:`~.Results` object while :func:`~.marginal_distribution` only
  works with a dictionary. The second is that :func:`~.marginal_counts` does
  not respect the order of indices in its ``indices`` argument while
  :func:`~.marginal_distribution` does and will permute the output bits
  based on the ``indices`` order. The third difference is that
  :func:`~.marginal_distribution` should be faster as its implementation
  is written in Rust and streamlined for just marginalizing a dictionary
  input.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-overloading@-3fedb7bc2fd4d7f7.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added the ``@`` (``__matmul__``) binary operator to ``BaseOperator`` subclasses
  in the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. This is shorthand to call the
  classes' ``dot`` method (``A @ B == A.dot(B)``).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-parameters-to-decompose-5a541d1b5afe2c68.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new optional argument, ``reps``, to
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.decompose`, which allows
  repeated decomposition of the circuit. For example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
      circuit.ry(0.5, 0)

      # Equivalent to circuit.decompose().decompose()
      circuit.decompose(reps=2)

      # decompose 2 times, but only RY gate 2 times and R gate 1 times
      circuit.decompose(gates_to_decompose=['ry','r'], reps=2)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-serializable-parametric-pulse-31490c4d2cc49ec6.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new pulse base class :class:`.SymbolicPulse`. This is a
  replacement of the conventional :class:`.ParametricPulse`, which will be deprecated.
  In the new base class, pulse-envelope and parameter-validation functions are
  represented by symbolic-expression objects.
  The new class provides self-contained and portable pulse data since these symbolic equations
  can be easily serialized through symbolic computation libraries.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-support-non-hermitian-op-aerpauliexpectation-653d8e16de4eca07.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added support for non-Hermitian operators in :class:`.AerPauliExpectation`.
  This allows the use of Aer's fast snapshot expectation computations in
  algorithms such as :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.QEOM`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-textbook-circuit-style-98600038608c8f75.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new circuit drawing style, ``textbook``, which uses the color
  scheme of the Qiskit Textbook.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/cleanup-timeline-drawer-a6287bdab4459e6e.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- A new attribute :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.op_start_times`
  is populated when one of scheduling analysis passes is run on the circuit.
  It can be used to obtain circuit instruction with instruction time, for example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile
    from qiskit.providers.fake_provider import FakeMontreal

    backend = FakeMontreal()

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)

    qct = transpile(
        qc, backend, initial_layout=[0, 1], coupling_map=[[0, 1]], scheduling_method="alap"
    )
    scheduled_insts = list(zip(qct.op_start_times, qct.data))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/clear-circuit-b8edd4126f47d75a.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new method :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.clear` which is used to remove all instructions
  from a :class:`.QuantumCircuit`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/clear-circuit-b8edd4126f47d75a.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new method :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.copy_empty_like` which is used to get a cleared copy of a
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` instance. This is logically equivalent to ``qc.copy().clear()``, but
  significantly faster and more memory-efficient.  This is useful when one needs a new empty
  circuit with all the same resources (qubits, classical bits, metadata, and so on) already
  added.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/expand-instruction-supported-c3c9a02b2faa9785.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The :meth:`.Target.instruction_supported` method now supports two new
  keyword arguments, ``operation_class`` and ``parameters``. Using these
  arguments the :meth:`~.Target.instruction_supported` method can now be used
  for checking that a specific operation with parameter values are supported
  by a :class:`~.Target` object. For example, if you want to check if a
  :class:`~.Target` named ``target`` supports running a :class:`~.RXGate`
  with :math:`\theta = \frac{\pi}{2}` you would do something like::

      from math import pi
      from qiskit.circuit.library import RXGate

      target.instruction_supported(operation_class=RXGate, parameters=[pi/2])

  which will return ``True`` if ``target`` supports running :class:`~.RXGate`
  with :math:`\theta = \frac{\pi}{2}` and ``False`` if it does not.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/feature-trotter-qrte-f7b28c4fd4b361d2.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a Trotterization-based quantum real-time evolution algorithm
  :class:`qiskit.algorithms.TrotterQRTE`. It is compliant with the new quantum time evolution
  framework and makes use of the :class:`.ProductFormula` and
  :class:`.PauliEvolutionGate` implementations.

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.algorithms import EvolutionProblem
    from qiskit.algorithms.evolvers.trotterization import TrotterQRTE
    from qiskit.opflow import X, Z, StateFn, SummedOp

    operator = SummedOp([X, Z])
    initial_state = StateFn([1, 0])
    time = 1
    evolution_problem = EvolutionProblem(operator, time, initial_state)

    trotter_qrte = TrotterQRTE()
    evolution_result = trotter_qrte.evolve(evolution_problem)
    evolved_state_circuit = evolution_result.evolved_state

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/generate_pass_manager_preset-1e6c9641accd5d60.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new function :func:`~.generate_preset_pass_manager` which can
  be used to quickly generate a preset :class:`~.PassManager` object that mirrors the
  :class:`~.PassManager` used internally by the :func:`~.transpile` function. For example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
    from qiskit.providers.fake_provider import FakeWashingtonV2

    # Generate an optimization level 3 pass manager targeting FakeWashingtonV2
    pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manager(3, FakeWashingtonV2())

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/marginal-memory-29d9d6586ae78590.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new function :func:`~.marginal_memory` which is used to marginalize
  shot memory arrays. Provided with the shot memory array and the indices
  of interest, the function will return a maginized shot memory array. This
  function differs from the memory support in the :func:`~.marginal_counts`
  method which only works on the ``memory`` field in a :class:`~.Results`
  object.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/primitive-interface-408b91ed338a5bc4.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The primitives interface has been extended to accept objects in addition to indices
  as arguments to the ``__call__`` method.  The ``parameter_values`` argument can now be optional.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/qasm3-exporter-delay-ef3003e01412c97e.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The OpenQASM 3 exporter (:mod:`qiskit.qasm3`) now supports exporting circuits
  with explicit delays, such as from :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.delay`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/qiskit-toqm-41bd0f3b6760df6f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new layout and routing method to :func:`.transpile` based on the paper
  `"Time-optimal qubit mapping" <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3445814.3446706>`__.
  To use it, the optional package
  `Qiskit TOQM <https://github.com/qiskit-toqm/qiskit-toqm>`__ must be
  installed. The ``routing_method`` kwarg of
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` supports an additional value, ``'toqm'``
  which is used to enable layout and routing via TOQM.

  To install ``qiskit-toqm`` along with Terra, run:

  .. code-block::

     pip install qiskit-terra[toqm]

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/quantum_shannon_decomp-facaa362a3ca8ba3.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new module ``qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis.qsd`` to apply Quantum
  Shannon Decomposition of arbitrary unitaries. This functionality replaces
  the previous isometry-based approach in the default unitary synthesis
  transpiler pass as well as when adding unitaries to a circuit using a
  :class:`.UnitaryGate`.

  The Quantum Shannon Decomposition uses about half the cnot gates as the
  isometry implementation when decomposing unitary matrices of greater than
  two qubits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/scaler-multiplication-left-side-7bea0d73f9afabe2.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Classes in the :mod:`.quantum_info` module that support scalar multiplication
  can now be multiplied by a scalar from either the left or the right.
  Previously, they would only accept scalar multipliers from the left.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/speedup-lookahead-swap-4dd162fee2d25d10.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The transpiler pass :class:`.LookaheadSwap` (used by :func:`.transpile` when
  ``routing_method="lookahead"``) has seen some performance improvements and
  will now be approximately three times as fast.  This is purely being more
  efficient in its calculations, and does not change the complexity of the
  algorithm.  In most cases, a more modern routing algorithm like
  :class:`.SabreSwap` (``routing_method="sabre"``) will be vastly more
  performant.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/swap-strategies-3ab013ca60f02b36.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- New transpiler passes have been added. The transpiler pass :class:`.Commuting2qGateRouter`
  uses swap strategies to route a block of commuting gates to the coupling map. Indeed, routing
  is a hard problem but is significantly easier when the gates commute as in CZ networks.
  Blocks of commuting gates are also typically found in QAOA. Such cases can be dealt with
  using swap strategies that apply a predefined set of layers of SWAP gates. Furthermore, the new
  transpiler pass :class:`.FindCommutingPauliEvolutions` identifies blocks of Pauli evolutions
  made of commuting two-qubit terms. Here, a swap strategy is specified by the class
  :class:`.SwapStrategy`. Swap strategies need to be tailored to the coupling map and, ideally,
  the circuit for the best results.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/umda-optimizer-9ddcda3d25cd8d9a.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Introduced a new optimizer to Qiskit library, which adds support to the
  optimization of parameters of variational quantum algorithms. This is
  the Univariate Marginal Distribution Algorithm (UMDA), which is a specific
  type of the Estimation of Distribution Algorithms.  For example::

    from qiskit.opflow import X, Z, I
    from qiskit import Aer
    from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import UMDA
    from qiskit.algorithms import QAOA
    from qiskit.utils import QuantumInstance

    H2_op = (-1.052373245772859 * I ^ I) + \
            (0.39793742484318045 * I ^ Z) + \
            (-0.39793742484318045 * Z ^ I) + \
            (-0.01128010425623538 * Z ^ Z) + \
            (0.18093119978423156 * X ^ X)

    p = 2  # Toy example: 2 layers with 2 parameters in each layer: 4 variables

    opt = UMDA(maxiter=100, size_gen=20)
    backend = Aer.get_backend('statevector_simulator')
    vqe = QAOA(opt,
               quantum_instance=QuantumInstance(backend=backend),
               reps=p)

    result = vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(operator=H2_op)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/unroll3q-target-bf57cc4365808862.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The constructor for the :class:`~.Unroll3qOrMore` transpiler pass has
  two new optional keyword arguments, ``target`` and ``basis_gates``. These
  options enable you to specify the :class:`~.Target` or supported basis
  gates respectively to describe the target backend. If any of the operations
  in the circuit are in the ``target`` or ``basis_gates`` those will not
  be unrolled by the pass as the target device has native support for the
  operation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/upgrade-qpy-schedule-f28f6a48a3abb4de.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- QPY serialization has been upgraded to support :class:`.ScheduleBlock`.
  Now you can save pulse program in binary and load it at later time::

    from qiskit import pulse, qpy

    with pulse.build() as schedule:
        pulse.play(pulse.Gaussian(160, 0.1, 40), pulse.DriveChannel(0))

    with open('schedule.qpy', 'wb') as fd:
        qpy.dump(schedule, fd)

    with open('schedule.qpy', 'rb') as fd:
        new_schedule = qpy.load(fd)[0]

  This uses the QPY interface common to :class:`.QuantumCircuit`.
  See :ref:`qpy_schedule_block` for details of data structure.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/vf2-post-layout-f0213e2c7ebb645c.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Added a new transpiler pass, :class:`~.VF2PostLayout`. This pass is of a
  new type to perform a new phase/function in the compilation pipeline,
  post-layout or post optimization qubit selection. The idea behind this
  pass is after we finish the optimization loop in transpiler we
  know what the final gate counts will be on each qubit in the circuit so
  we can potentially find a better-performing subset of qubits on a backend
  to execute the circuit. The pass will search for an isomorphic subgraph in
  the connectivity graph of the target backend and look at the full error
  rate of the complete circuit on any subgraph found and return the
  layout found with the lowest error rate for the circuit.

  This pass is similar to the :class:`~.VF2Layout` pass and both internally
  use the same VF2 implementation from
  `retworkx <https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx>`__. However,
  :class:`~.VF2PostLayout` is deisgned to run after initial layout, routing,
  basis translation, and any optimization passes run and will only work if
  a layout has already been applied, the circuit has been routed, and all
  gates are in the target basis. This is required so that when a new layout
  is applied the circuit can still be run on the target device. :class:`~.VF2Layout`
  on the other hand is designed to find a perfect initial layout and can
  work with any circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/vf2-post-layout-f0213e2c7ebb645c.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The :class:`~.ApplyLayout` transpiler pass now has support for updating
  a layout on a circuit after a layout has been applied once before. If
  the ``post_layout`` field is present (in addition to the required
  ``layout`` field) the ``property_set`` when the :class:`~.ApplyLayout` pass
  is run the pass will update the layout to apply the new layout. This will
  return a :class:`~.DAGCircuit` with the qubits in the new physical order
  and the ``layout`` property set will be updated so that it maps the
  virtual qubits from the original layout to the physical qubits in the new
  ``post_layout`` field.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/vf2-post-layout-f0213e2c7ebb645c.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The preset pass managers generated by :func:`~.level_1_pass_manager`,
  :func:`~.level_2_pass_manager`, and :func:`~.level_3_pass_manager` which
  correspond to ``optimization_level`` 1, 2, and 3 respectively on the
  :func:`~.transpile` function now run the :class:`~.VF2PostLayout` pass
  after running the routing pass. This enables the transpiler to
  potentially find a different set of physical qubits on the target backend
  to run the circuit on which have lower error rates. The
  :class:`~.VF2PostLayout` pass will not be run if you manually specify a
  ``layout_method``, ``routing_method``, or ``initial_layout`` arguments
  to :func:`~.transpile`. If the pass can find a better performing subset of
  qubits on backend to run the physical circuit it will adjust the layout of
  the circuit to use the alternative qubits instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/vqd-implementation-details-09b0ead8b42cacda.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The algorithm iteratively computes each eigenstate by starting from the ground
  state (which is computed as in VQE) and then optimising a modified cost function
  that tries to compute eigen states that are orthogonal to the states computed in
  the previous iterations and have the lowest energy when computed over the ansatz.
  The interface implemented is very similar to that of VQE and is of the form:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.algorithms import VQD
    from qiskit.utils import QuantumInstance
    from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
    from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import COBYLA
    from qiskit import BasicAer
    from qiskit.opflow import I,Z,X

    h2_op = (
        -1.052373245772859 * (I ^ I)
        + 0.39793742484318045 * (I ^ Z)
        - 0.39793742484318045 * (Z ^ I)
        - 0.01128010425623538 * (Z ^ Z)
        + 0.18093119978423156 * (X ^ X)
    )

    vqd = VQD(k =2, ansatz = TwoLocal(rotation_blocks="ry", entanglement_blocks="cz"),optimizer = COBYLA(maxiter = 0), quantum_instance = QuantumInstance(
                BasicAer.get_backend("qasm_simulator"), shots = 2048)
            )
    vqd_res = vqd.compute_eigenvalues(op)

  This particular code snippet generates 2 eigenvalues (ground and 1st excited state)
  Tests have also been implemented.


.. _Release Notes_0.21.0rc1_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add-serializable-parametric-pulse-31490c4d2cc49ec6.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The pulse classes in :mod:`qiskit.pulse.library` are now subclasses of
  :class:`.SymbolicPulse` rather than :class:`.ParametricPulse`.  The available
  classes remain unchanged as
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Gaussian`,
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.GaussianSquare`,
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Drag`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Constant`.
  :class:`.SymbolicPulse` has full backward compatibility, and there should be
  no loss of functionality.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/change-instruction-data-scalar-81f2066ca2435933.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The data type of each element in :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.data` has changed.
  It used to be a simple 3-tuple of an :class:`~.circuit.Instruction`, a list
  of :class:`.Qubit`\ s, and a list of :class:`.Clbit`\ s, whereas it is now
  an instance of :class:`.CircuitInstruction`.

  The attributes of this new class are :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.operation`,
  :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.qubits` and :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.clbits`,
  corresponding to the elements of the previous tuple.  However,
  :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.qubits` and :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.clbits`
  are now ``tuple`` instances, not ``list``\ s.

  This new class will behave exactly like the old 3-tuple if one attempts to
  access its index its elements, or iterate through it.  This includes casting
  the :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.qubits` and :attr:`~.CircuitInstruction.clbits`
  elements to lists.  This is to assist backwards compatibility.  Starting from
  Qiskit Terra 0.21, this is no longer the preferred way to access these elements.
  Instead, you should use the attribute-access form described above.

  This has been done to allow further developments of the :class:`.QuantumCircuit`
  data structure in Terra, without constantly breaking backwards compatibility.
  Planned developments include dynamic parameterized circuits, and an overall
  reduction in memory usage of deep circuits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/constraint-optional-b6a2b2ee21211ccd.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The ``python-constraint`` dependency, which is used solely by the
  :class:`~.CSPLayout` transpiler pass, is no longer in the requirements list
  for the Qiskit Terra package. This is because the :class:`~.CSPLayout` pass
  is no longer used by default in any of the preset pass managers for
  :func:`~.transpile`. While the pass is still available, if you're using it
  you will need to manually install ``python-contraint`` or when you
  install ``qiskit-terra`` you can use the ``csp-layout`` extra, for example::

      pip install "qiskit-terra[csp-layout]"

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-qpy-controlled-gates-e653cbeee067f90b.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The QPY version format version emitted by :func:`.qpy.dump` has been
  increased to version 5. This new format version is incompatible with the
  previous versions and will result in an error when trying to load it with
  a deserializer that isn't able to handle QPY version 5. This change was
  necessary to fix support for representing controlled gates properly and
  representing non-default control states.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/msrv-0b626e1cfb415abf.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Qiskit Terra's compiled Rust extensions now have a minimum supported Rust
  version (MSRV) of 1.56.1. This means when building Qiskit Terra from source
  the oldest version of the Rust compiler supported is 1.56.1. If you are using
  an older version of the Rust compiler you will need to update to a newer
  version to continue to build Qiskit from source. This change was necessary
  as a number of upstream dependencies have updated their minimum supported
  versions too.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/parallelize-circuit-scheduling-972d4616eabb2ccb.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Circuit scheduling now executes in parallel when more than one
  circuit is provided to :func:`~.compiler.schedule`. Refer to
  `#2695 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/2695>`__
  for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-basebackend-7beac0abd17144fe.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The previously deprecated ``BaseBackend``, ``BaseJob``, and ``BaseProvider``
  classes have all been removed. They were originally deprecated in the
  0.18.0 release. Instead of these classes you should be using the versioned
  providers interface classes, the latest being :class:`~.BackendV2`,
  :class:`~.JobV1`, and :class:`~.ProviderV1`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-basebackend-7beac0abd17144fe.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The previously deprecated ``backend`` argument for the constructor of the
  :class:`~.RZXCalibrationBuilder` transpiler pass has been removed. It was
  originally deprecated in the 0.19.0 release. Instead you should query
  the :class:`~.Backend` object for the ``instruction_schedule_map`` and
  ``qubit_channel_mapping`` and pass that directly to the constructor. For
  example, with a :class:`~.BackendV1` backend::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.providers.fake_provider import FakeMumbai

      backend = FakeMumbai()
      inst_map = backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map
      channel_map = backend.configuration().qubit_channel_mapping
      cal_pass = RZXCalibrationBuilder(
          instruction_schedule_map=inst_map,
          qubit_channel_mapping=channel_map,
      )

  or with a :class:`~.BackendV2` backend::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.providers.fake_provider import FakeMumbaiV2

      backend = FakeMumbaiV2()
      inst_map = backend.instruction_schedule_map
      channel_map = {bit: backend.drive_channel(bit) for bit in range(backend.num_qubits)}
      cal_pass = RZXCalibrationBuilder(
          instruction_schedule_map=inst_map,
          qubit_channel_mapping=channel_map,
      )

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-basicaer-shot-limit-b7cd4e6f6739885c.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The measurement shot limit for the :class:`.BasicAer` backend has been removed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-dagnode-deprecations-30703a2156d52b8a.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- For the :class:`~DAGNode`, the previously deprecated ``type``, ``op``,
  ``qargs``, ``cargs``, and ``wire`` kwargs and attributes have been removed.
  These were originally deprecated in the 0.19.0 release. The ``op``,
  ``qargs``, and ``cargs`` kwargs and attributes can be accessed only on
  instances of :class:`~DAGOpNode`, and the ``wire`` kwarg and attribute are
  only on instances of :class:`~DAGInNode` or :class:`~DAGOutNode`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecate-calsses-methods-7bd69606cc4ad61f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The deprecated function :func:`.pauli_group` has been removed.
  It was originally deprecated in Qiskit Terra 0.17.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecate-calsses-methods-7bd69606cc4ad61f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Several deprecated methods on :class:`.Pauli` have been removed, which were
  originally deprecated in Qiskit Terra 0.17.  These were:

  ``sgn_prod``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.compose` or :meth:`.Pauli.dot` instead.

  ``to_spmatrix``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.to_matrix` with argument ``sparse=True`` instead.

  ``kron``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.expand`, but beware that this returns a new object, rather
    than mutating the existing one.

  ``update_z`` and ``update_x``
    Set the ``z`` and ``x`` attributes of the object directly.

  ``insert_paulis``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.insert`.

  ``append_paulis``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.expand`.

  ``delete_qubits``
    Use :meth:`.Pauli.delete`.

  ``pauli_single``
    Construct the label manually and pass directly to the initializer, such as::

      Pauli("I" * index + pauli_label + "I" * (num_qubits - index - len(pauli_label)))

  ``random``
    Use :func:`.quantum_info.random_pauli` instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecated-optimizer-methods-d580a07112ccaa2d.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Removed the ``optimize`` method from the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer`
  classes, which is superseded by the :meth:`~.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer.minimize` method as direct replacement.
  The one exception is :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA`, where the
  deprecation warning was not triggered so the method there is still kept.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/result-fix-e4eaa021f49b5f99.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- :class:`.Result` was modified so that it always contains ``date``, ``status``,
  and ``header`` attributes (set to ``None`` if not specified).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/shared-memory-dependency-1e32e1c55902216f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- For Python 3.7 `shared-memory38 <https://pypi.org/project/shared-memory38/>`__
  is now a dependency. This was added as a dependency for Python 3.7 to enable
  leveraging the shared memory constructs in the standard library of newer
  versions of Python. If you're running on Python >= 3.8 there is no extra
  dependency required.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/type-check-instruction-labels-on-creation-8399dd8b5d72f272.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- :class:`~.circuit.Instruction` labels are now type-checked on instruction creation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/upgrade-qpy-schedule-f28f6a48a3abb4de.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- QPY serialization has been upgraded to serialize :class:`.QuantumCircuit`
  with :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.calibrations`. As of QPY Version 5, only calibration
  entries of :class:`.ScheduleBlock` type can be serialized.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/xxplusyy-convention-e181e74271a9e9e1.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The definition of :class:`.XXPlusYYGate` has been changed.
  See `#7969 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7949>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-hard-time-limit-vf2-be83830ecc71f72c.yaml @ b'5a8bb42ec02753dce68ea0d28986453d07d071b2'

- The preset pass managers generated by :func:`~.level_1_pass_manager`,
  :func:`~.level_2_pass_manager`, and :func:`~.level_3_pass_manager` and used
  by the :func:`~.transpile` function's ``optimization_level`` argument at
  1, 2, and 3 respectively no longer set a hard time limit on the
  :class:`~.VF2Layout` transpiler pass. This means that the pass will no
  longer stop trying to find a better alternative perfect layout up until a
  fixed time limit (100ms for level 1, 10 sec for level 2, and 60 sec for
  level 3) as doing this limited the reproducibility of compilation when a
  perfect layout was available. This means that the output when using the pass
  might be different than before, although in all cases it would only change
  if a lower noise set of qubits can be found over the previous output. If
  you wish to retain the previous behavior you can create a custom
  :class:`~.PassManager` that sets the ``time_limit`` argument on the
  constructor for the :class:`~VF2Layout` pass.


.. _Release Notes_0.21.0rc1_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/cleanup-timeline-drawer-a6287bdab4459e6e.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Calling :func:`.timeline_drawer` with an unscheduled circuit has been deprecated.
  All circuits, even one consisting only of delay instructions,
  must be transpiled with the ``scheduling_method`` keyword argument of
  :func:`.transpile` set, to generate schedule information being stored in
  :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.op_start_times`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/deprecate-nx-dag-f8a8d947186222c2.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The `NetworkX <https://networkx.org/>`__  converter functions for the
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.to_networkx` and
  :meth:`~.DAGCircuit.from_networkx`, along with the
  :meth:`.DAGDependency.to_networkx` method have been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. Qiskit has been using
  `retworkx <https://qiskit.org/documentation/retworkx/>`__ as its graph
  library since the qiskit-terra 0.12.0 release, and since then the networkx
  converter functions have been lossy. They were originally added so
  that users could leverage functionality in NetworkX's algorithms library
  not present in retworkx.  Since that time, retworkx has matured
  and offers more functionality, and the :class:`~.DAGCircuit` is tightly
  coupled to retworkx for its operation. Having these converter methods
  provides limited value moving forward and are therefore going to be
  removed in a future release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/deprecate-old-optional-paths-982466a6336e4794.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Accessing several old toggles (``HAS_MATPLOTLIB``, ``HAS_PDFTOCAIRO``,
  ``HAS_PYLATEX`` and ``HAS_PIL``) from the :mod:`qiskit.visualization` module
  is now deprecated, and these import paths will be removed in a future
  version of Qiskit Terra.  The same objects should instead be accessed
  through :mod:`qiskit.utils.optionals`, which contains testers for almost all
  of Terra's optional dependencies.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/move-qiskit.test.mock-to-qiskit.providers.fake_provider-7f36ff80a05f9a9a.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The ``qiskit.test.mock`` module is now deprecated. The fake backend and fake provider classes
  which were previously available in ``qiskit.test.mock`` have been accessible in
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.fake_provider` since Terra 0.20.0. This change represents a proper
  commitment to support the fake backend classes as part of Qiskit, whereas previously they were
  just part of the internal testing suite, and were exposed to users as a side effect.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/primitive-interface-408b91ed338a5bc4.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The arguments' names when calling an :class:`~.primitives.Estimator` or
  :class:`~.primitives.Sampler` object as a function are renamed from
  ``circuit_indices`` and ``observable_indices`` to ``circuits`` and
  ``observables``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-basebackend-7beac0abd17144fe.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The ``qobj_id`` and ``qobj_header`` keyword arguments for the
  :func:`~.execute` function have been deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Since the removal of the ``BaseBackend`` class these
  arguments don't have any effect as no backend supports execution with a
  :class:`~.Qobj` object directly and instead only work with
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` objects directly.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecate-calsses-methods-7bd69606cc4ad61f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The arguments ``x``, ``z`` and ``label`` to the initializer of
  :class:`.Pauli` were documented as deprecated in Qiskit Terra 0.17, but a bug
  prevented the expected warning from being shown at runtime.  The warning will
  now correctly show, and the arguments will be removed in Qiskit Terra 0.23 or
  later.  A pair of ``x`` and ``z`` should be passed positionally as a single
  tuple (``Pauli((z, x))``).  A string ``label`` should be passed positionally
  in the first argument (``Pauli("XYZ")``).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecated-optimizer-methods-d580a07112ccaa2d.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The :meth:`.SPSA.optimize` method is deprecated in
  favor of :meth:`.SPSA.minimize`, which can be used
  as direct replacement. Note that this method returns a complete result
  object with more information than before available.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/upgrade-qpy-schedule-f28f6a48a3abb4de.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The ``circuits`` argument of :func:`.qpy.dump` has been deprecated and
  replaced with ``programs`` since now QPY supports multiple data types other than circuits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/upgrade-qpy-schedule-f28f6a48a3abb4de.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- :meth:`.AlignmentKind.to_dict` method has been deprecated and will be removed.


.. _Release Notes_0.21.0rc1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/3842-14af3f8d922a7253.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Extra validation was added to :class:`.DiagonalGate` to check the argument has modulus one.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/add_check_from_sparse_list-97f13fde87c7bcb6.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Duplicate qubit indices given to :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.from_sparse_list` will now
  correctly raise an error, instead of silently overwriting previous values.
  The old behavior can be accessed by passing the new keyword argument ``do_checks=False``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/cleanup-timeline-drawer-a6287bdab4459e6e.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The :func:`.timeline_drawer` visualization will no longer misalign classical
  register slots.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/consistent-validation-for-gaussian-square-pulse-461087a09ff339a4.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Parameter validation for :class:`~.pulse.library.GaussianSquare` is now
  consistent before and after construction.
  Refer to `#7882 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7882>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/delay-fake-backends-3f68c074e85d531f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The :class:`~.BackendV2`\ -based fake backends in
  the :mod:`qiskit.providers.fake_provider` module, such as
  :class:`.FakeMontrealV2`, now support the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` operation
  in their :attr:`~.BackendV2.target` attributes.  Previously, :class:`.QuantumCircuit` objects
  that contained delays could not be compiled to these backends.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-eigs_bounds-function-in-TridiagonalToeplitz-class-52cfad8f72ae7341.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed a bug in :meth:`.TridiagonalToeplitz.eigs_bounds`, which caused
  incorrect eigenvalue bounds to be returned in some cases with negative
  eigenvalues. Refer to `#7939 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7939>`__
  for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-latex-ket-max-size-f11c3a89215a49e7.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed a bug in which the LaTeX statevector drawer ignored the ``max_size``
  parameter.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-pm-config-backend_v2-ac8b83267105a47d.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed support in the :meth:`.PassManagerConfig.from_backend` constructor
  method for building a :class:`~.PassManagerConfig` object from a
  :class:`~.BackendV2` instance. Previously this wasn't handled correctly
  and would fail when running with a :class:`~.BackendV2` object.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-qpy-controlled-gates-e653cbeee067f90b.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed support for QPY serialization (:func:`.qpy.dump`) and deserialization
  (:func:`.qpy.load`) of a :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` object containing custom
  :class:`~.ControlledGate` objects. Previously, an exception would be raised
  by :func:`.qpy.load` when trying to reconstruct the custom
  :class:`~.ControlledGate`.
  Fixed `#7999 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7999>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-qpy-controlled-gates-e653cbeee067f90b.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed support for QPY serialization (:func:`.qpy.dump`) and deserialization
  (:func:`.qpy.load`) of a :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` object containing custom
  :class:`~.MCPhaseGate` objects. Previously, an exception would be raised
  by :func:`.qpy.load` when trying to reconstruct the :class:`~.MCPhaseGate`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-qpy-controlled-gates-e653cbeee067f90b.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed support for QPY serialization (:func:`.qpy.dump`) and deserialization
  (:func:`.qpy.load`) of a :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` object containing
  controlled gates with an open control state. Previously, the open control
  state would be lost by the serialization process and the reconstructed
  circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-reverse_bits-with-registerless-bits-6d17597b99640fb0.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` with circuits containing registerless
  :class:`.Qubit` and :class:`.Clbit`. For example, the following will now work::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Qubit, Clbit

      qc = QuantumCircuit([Qubit(), Clbit()])
      qc.h(0).c_if(qc.clbits[0], 0)
      qc.reverse_bits()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-t2-configurablefakebackend-8660ab3d7a57a824.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed the :attr:`.ConfigurableFakeBackend.t2` attribute,
  which was previously incorrectly set based on the provided ``t1`` value.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-target-dt-4d306f1e9b07f819.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed an issue with :class:`~.BackendV2`\ -based fake backend classes from the
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.fake_provider` module such as :class:`.FakeMontrealV2` where the
  value for the :attr:`~.BackendV2.dt` attribute (and the :attr:`.Target.dt` attribute)
  were not properly being converted to seconds. This would cause issues when
  using these fake backends with scheduling.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix_plot_histogram_number-a0a4a023dfad3c70.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed a bug in :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram` when the
  ``number_to_keep`` argument was smaller that the number of keys. The
  following code will no longer throw errors and will be properly aligned::

      from qiskit.visualization import plot_histogram
      data = {'00': 3, '01': 5, '11': 8, '10': 11}
      plot_histogram(data, number_to_keep=2)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/param-table-perf-72cd1c40533b3882.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Improved the performance of building and working with parameterized
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` instances with many gates
  that share a relatively small number of parameters.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/qasm3-fix-basis-gates-c96a0b357dfdcb47.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The OpenQASM 3 exporter (:mod:`qiskit.qasm3`) will no longer attempt to produce
  definitions for non-standard gates in the ``basis_gates`` option.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-deprecated-optimizer-methods-d580a07112ccaa2d.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed the getter of :attr:`.OptimizerResult.nit`, which
  previously returned the number of Jacobian evaluations instead of the number of iterations.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/result-fix-e4eaa021f49b5f99.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed a bug in the string representation of :class:`.Result` objects that
  caused the attributes to be specified incorrectly.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/shared-memory-dependency-1e32e1c55902216f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed an issue with :func:`~.transpile` where in some cases providing a
  list of basis gate strings with the ``basis_gates`` keyword argument or
  implicitly via a :class:`~.Target` input via the ``target`` keyword
  argument would not be interpreted correctly and result in a subset of the
  listed gates being used for each circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/shared-memory-dependency-1e32e1c55902216f.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`~.UnitarySynthesis` transpiler pass which
  would result in an error when a :class:`~.Target` that didn't have any
  qubit restrictions on the operations (e.g. in the case of an ideal
  simulator target) was specified with the ``target`` keyword argument for the
  constructor.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/fix-marginal_counts-on-pulse-backend.yaml @ b'0f377f7a2cdbd7eaa46e8e2b5de974c8c22b9612'

- The method :meth:`qiskit.result.marginal_counts`, when passed a :class:`.Result` from a
  pulse backend, would fail, because it contains an array of
  :class:`.ExperimentResult` objects, each of which have an :class:`QobjExperimentHeader`, and those
  :class:`ExperimentHeaders` lack `creg_sizes` instance-variables.  If the :class:`Result` came
  from a simulator backend (e.g. Aer), that instance-variable would be there.
  We fix :class:`marginal_counts` so that it skips logic that needs `creg_sizes` if the
  field is not present, or non-None.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qasm2-identity-as-unitary-aa2feeb05707a597.yaml @ b'd7f932c8b242f69c5577afd5593bf36f839657f7'

- The OpenQASM 2 exporter (:meth:`.QuantumCircuit.qasm`) will now correctly
  define the qubit parameters for :class:`.UnitaryGate` operations that do
  not affect all the qubits they are defined over.
  Fixed `#8224 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8224>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.21/remove-hard-time-limit-vf2-be83830ecc71f72c.yaml @ b'5a8bb42ec02753dce68ea0d28986453d07d071b2'

- Fixed an issue with reproducibility of the :func:`~.transpile` function
  when running with ``optimization_level`` 1, 2, and 3. Previously, under
  some conditions when there were multiple perfect layouts (a layout that
  doesn't require any SWAP gates) available the selected layout and output
  circuit could vary regardless of whether the ``seed_transpiler`` argument
  was set.


Aer 0.10.4
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.19.2
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- In the upcoming terra release there will be a release candidate tagged
  prior to the final release. However changing the version string for the
  package is blocked on the qiskit-ibmq-provider right now because it is trying
  to parse the version and is assuming there will be no prelease suffix on
  the version string (see `#8200 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/8200>`__
  for the details). PR `#1135 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1135>`__
  fixes this version parsing to use the regex from the
  pypa/packaging project which handles all the PEP440 package versioning
  include pre-release suffixes. This will enable terra to release an
  0.21.0rc1 tag without breaking the qiskit-ibmq-provider.

- ``threading.currentThread`` and ``notifyAll`` were deprecated in Python 3.10 (October 2021)
  and will be removed in Python 3.12 (October 2023).
  PR `#1133 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1133>`__ replaces them
  with ``threading.current_thread``, ``notify_all`` added in Python 2.6 (October 2008).


*************
Qiskit 0.36.2
*************

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.2:

Terra 0.20.2
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.20.2-0fb90e19e89fe4ac.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

Qiskit Terra 0.20.2 is a bugfix release, addressing some minor issues identified since the last patch release.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-fake-backend-v2-dtm-unit-392a8fe3fcc9b793.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- Fixed an issue with :class:`~.BackendV2`\ -based fake backend classes from the
  ``qiskit.providers.fake_provider`` module such as ``FakeMontrealV2``, where the
  values for the :attr:`~.BackendV2.dtm` and :attr:`~.BackendV2.dt` attributes
  and the associated attribute :attr:`.Target.dt` would not be properly
  converted to seconds. This would cause issues when using these fake backends
  with scheduling.  See `#8018 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8018>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-marginal_counts-zero-memory-0f6710d6923c8ad7.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- :func:`.marginal_counts` will now succeed when asked to marginalize memory
  with an ``indices`` parameter containing non-zero elements.  Previously,
  shots whose hexadecimal result representation was sufficiently small could
  raise a ``ValueError``.  See `#8044 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8044>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-qasm3-global-statement-order-ca8bdb35e0fb8dec.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- The OpenQASM 3 exporter (:mod:`qiskit.qasm3`) will now output ``input`` or
  ``output`` declarations before gate declarations.  This is more consistent
  with the current reference ANTLR grammar from the OpenQASM 3 team.
  See `#7964 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7964>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-rzx-builder-pulse-amp-ba5c876ddea17c41.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- Fixed a bug in the :class:`.RZXCalibrationBuilder` transpiler pass where
  the scaled cross-resonance pulse amplitude could appear to be parametrized
  even after assignment. This could cause the pulse visualization tools to
  use the parametrized format instead of the expected numeric one.
  See `#8031 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/8031>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-transpile-backendv2-durations-dbc85688564cc271.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~.transpile` function when run with a
  :class:`~.BackendV2`\ -based backend and setting the ``scheduling_method``
  keyword argument. Previously, the function would not correctly process
  the default durations of the instructions supported by the backend which
  would lead to an error.

.. releasenotes/notes/pulse-round-a014390e414c79c8.yaml @ b'f9327925f6d82c2807e7811c4b16eee0f1076c9f'

- Fixed a bug in the :class:`~.RZXCalibrationBuilder` transpiler pass that was
  causing pulses to sometimes be constructed with incorrect durations.
  See `#7994 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7994>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/sabreswap-fix-condition-593f36e855f9064c.yaml @ b'a094757d9c15b0cfd885016d82ec19bc775086cd'

- The :class:`.SabreSwap` transpiler pass, used in :func:`.transpile` when
  ``routing_method="sabre"`` is set, will no longer sporadically drop
  classically conditioned gates and their successors from circuits during the
  routing phase of transpilation.  See
  `#8040 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8040>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/statevector-enable-iter-4652d7ce87f4d459.yaml @ b'8827c554982d779bc1fa5f01f1f09d91c3854a6f'

- :class:`.Statevector` will now allow direct iteration through its values
  (such as ``for coefficient in statevector``) and
  correctly report its length under ``len``.  Previously it would try and
  and access out-of-bounds data and raise a :class:`.QiskitError`.  See
  `#8039 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/8039>`__.

Aer 0.10.4
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.1:

Ignis 0.7.1
===========

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.7.1-520c1e0dba0521f7.yaml @ b'3176f61a827c9b00ba006cdaad787fca55acc3a1'

This is a bugfix release that primarily fixes a packaging issue that was
causing the ``docs/`` directory, which contains the source files used to
build the qiskit-ignis documentation, to get included in the Python package.

IBM Q Provider 0.19.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.36.1
*************

Terra 0.20.1
============

.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.20.1-72b215a1ca1f34c8.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

Qiskit Terra 0.20.1 is a bugfix release resolving issues identified in release 0.20.0.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.1_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/ucr-gates-qpy-b8f6fb1e34fae258.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- QPY deserialization with the :func:`.qpy.load` function of a directly
  instantiated :class:`~.UCPauliRotGate` object in a circuit will fail
  because the rotation axis argument to the class isn't stored in a standard
  place. To workaround this you can instead use the subclasses:
  :class:`~.UCRXGate`, :class:`~.UCRYGate`, or :class:`~.UCRZGate` (based on
  whether you're using a rotation axis of ``"X"``, ``"Y"``, or ``"Z"``
  respectively) which embeds the rotation axis in the class constructor and
  will work correctly in QPY.

.. releasenotes/notes/xxplusyy-doc-c6ddcc45044dcdcd.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Since its original introduction in Qiskit Terra 0.20, :class:`.XXPlusYYGate`
  has used a negative angle convention compared to all other rotation gates.
  In Qiskit Terra 0.21, this will be corrected to be consistent with the
  other rotation gates.  This does not affect any other rotation gates, nor
  :class:`.XXMinusYYGate`.


.. _Release Notes_Terra_0.20.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/clifford_delay-be1a835413e2531e.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed :class:`.Clifford`, :class:`.Pauli` and :class:`.CNOTDihedral`
  operator initialization from compatible circuits that contain
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` instructions. These instructions are
  treated as identities when converting to operators.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-aux-ops-evaluator-83ce1606d1ad19b3.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed an issue where the :func:`~qiskit.algorithms.eval_observables` function would raise an
  error if its ``quantum_state`` argument was of type :class:`~qiskit.opflow.StateFn`.
  ``eval_observables`` now correctly supports all input types denoted by its type hints.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-dag-drawer-no-reg-6eee9d1f6e4b9261.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed an issue with the visualization function :func:`~.dag_drawer` and
  method :meth:`.DAGCircuit.draw` where previously the drawer would fail
  when attempting to generate a visualization for a :class:`~.DAGCircuit`
  object that contained a :class:`~.Qubit` or :class:`~.Clbit` which wasn't
  part of a :class:`~QuantumRegister` or :class:`~ClassicalRegister`.
  Fixed `#7915 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7915>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-drag-pulse-validation-905f9b6353a0f2d1.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed parameter validation for class :class:`~Drag`. Previously, it was not
  sensitive to large beta values with negative signs, which may have resulted in
  waveform samples with a maximum value exceeding the amplitude limit of 1.0.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-hard-coded-sleep-run-circuits-a1588164e61d5336.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- The :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class used by many algorithms (like :class:`~.VQE`)
  was hard-coding the value for a sleep while it looped waiting for the job status to be updated.
  It now respects the configured sleep value as set per the ``wait`` attribute in the
  initializer of :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance`.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-list-input-schedule-14fc48895a061735.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.compiler.schedule` function where
  callers specifying a ``list`` of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
  objects with a single entry would incorrectly be returned a single
  :class:`~.Schedule` object instead of a ``list``.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-plot-error-map-f3b4cc754b589d8f.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.plot_error_map` visualization function
  which prevented it from working when run with a backend that had readout
  error defined in the provided backend's :class:`~.BackendProperties` or
  when running with a :class:`~.BackendV2` backend.
  Fixed `#7879 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7879>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-primitive-init-observable-pauli-e312c05d1c3bd804.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed a bug that could result in exponential runtime and nontermination when
  a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` instance is given to method
  :meth:`~qiskit.primitives.utils.init_observables`.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-sabreswap-clbits-428eb5f3a46063da.yaml @ b'35645aaba47e317a5eb36748fd3900aaf4e45597'

- Fixed :class:`.SabreSwap`, and by extension :func:`.transpile` with
  ``optimization_level=3``, occasionally re-ordering measurements invalidly.
  Previously, if two measurements wrote to the same classical bit,
  :class:`.SabreSwap` could (depending on the coupling map) re-order them to
  produce a non-equivalent circuit.  This behaviour was stochastic, so may
  not have appeared reliably.
  Fixed `#7950 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7950>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/sabreswap-loop-230ef99e61358105.yaml @ b'a75c9a609b77a4807fcafc4c111d99edb434048e'

- The :class:`.SabreSwap` transpiler pass, and by extension
  :class:`.SabreLayout` and :func:`.transpile` at ``optimization_level=3``,
  now has an escape mechanism to guarantee that it can never get stuck in an
  infinite loop.  Certain inputs previously could, with a great amount of bad
  luck, get stuck in a stable local minimum of the search space and the pass
  would never make further progress.  It will now force a series of swaps that
  allow the routing to continue if it detects it has not made progress
  recently.  Fixed `#7707 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7707>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/ucr-gates-qpy-b8f6fb1e34fae258.yaml @ b'625b202a4dd0c223579dca44eec530b8a0813d76'

- Fixed an issue with QPY deserialization via the :func:`.qpy.load` function
  of the :class:`~.UCRXGate`, :class:`~.UCRYGate`, and :class:`~.UCRZGate`
  classes.
  Previously, a QPY file that contained any of these gates would error
  when trying to load the file.
  Fixed `#7847 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7847>`__.

Aer 0.10.4
==========

No change

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.19.1
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_IBMQ:

0.19.1
======

.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- PR `#1129 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1129>`__ updates
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.least_busy` method to no longer support `BaseBackend` as a valid
  input or output type since it has been long deprecated in qiskit-terra and has recently
  been removed.

*************
Qiskit 0.36.0
*************

Terra 0.20.0
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.4:

Aer 0.10.4
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.4_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/no-fast-math-1de357a9650094f3.yaml @ b'4f0cd3db74f922a6a3922d106498bb37d9ae1aaa'

- Qiskit Aer is no longer compiled with unsafe floating-point optimisations.
  While most of the effects should have been localised to Qiskit Aer, some
  aspects of subnormal handling may previously have been leaked into user code
  by the library incorrectly setting the "flush to zero" mode.  This will not
  happen any more.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.4_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/density-multi-chunk-fix-e9effc67d0365418.yaml @ b'346ec243d31192eef100663e9a7b90055cb84f6b'

- Fix cache blocking transpiler to recognize superop to be cache blocked.
  This is fix for
  `issue 1479 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1479>`
  now density_matrix with noise models can be parallelized.
  New test, test_noise.TestNoise.test_kraus_gate_noise_on_QFT_cache_blocking
  is added to verify this issue.
  Also this fix include fix for
  `issue 1483 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1483>`
  discovered by adding new test case.
  This fixes measure over chunks for statevector.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-invalid-t2-error-a3685e4a3ad0a1e7.yaml @ b'80478fec494bdf942f056cef704d3df3f6a1ac99'

- Fixes a bug in ``NoiseModel.from_backend()`` that raised an error when
  T2 value greater than 2 * T1 was supplied by the backend.
  After this fix, it becomes to truncate T2 value up to 2 * T1 and
  issue a user warning if truncates.
  The bug was introduced at #1391 and, before that, ``NoiseModel.from_backend()`` had
  truncated the T2 value up to 2 * T1 silently.

  See `Issue 1464 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1464>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-thrust-cpu-threads-67db86b2edcf06b3.yaml @ b'61e91e2277b72ff6e0feaf85054c06821fb1a6a0'

- device=Thrust was very slow for small number of qubits because OpenMP
  threading was always applied. This fix applies OpenMP threads as same
  as device=CPU by using statevector_parallel_threshold.

.. releasenotes/notes/no-fast-math-1de357a9650094f3.yaml @ b'4f0cd3db74f922a6a3922d106498bb37d9ae1aaa'

- Qiskit Aer will no longer set the floating-point mode to "flush to zero"
  when loaded.  Downstream users may previously have seen warnings from Numpy
  such as:

    The value of the smallest subnormal for <class 'numpy.float64'> type is zero.

  These will now no longer be emitted, and the floating-point handling will be
  correct.

.. releasenotes/notes/remove_circuit_metadata_from_qobj-324e7ea9b369ee67.yaml @ b'23f7c4b52119ceaa7332f638d6115472c08129d5'

- Fixed a potential issue with running simulations on circuits that have the
  :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.metadata` attribute set. The :attr:`~.QuantumCircuit.metadata`
  attribute can be any python dictionary and previously qiskit-aer would attempt to
  JSON serialize the contents of the attribute to process it with the rest of the rest
  of the circuit input, even if the contents were not JSON serializable. This no longer
  occurs as the :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.metadata`  attribute is not used to run the
  simulation so now the contents are no serialized and instead are directly attached
  to the :class:`qiskit.result.Result` object without attempting to JSON serialize
  the contents.
  Fixed `#1435 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1435>`__

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.19.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_IBMQ_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The qiskit-ibmq-provider package now supports IBM Quantum LiveData features.
  These features allow users to observe the real-time behavior of IBM Quantum
  backends while executing jobs. Specifically, the provider now includes a
  new tab in the backend Jupyter-related widget and supports the execution of
  jobs (via :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method) with the
  `live_data_enabled=True` parameter in allowed IBM Quantum backends.

- You can now specify a different logging level in the ``options`` keyword
  when submitting a Qiskit Runtime job with the
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.run` method.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_IBMQ_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Python 3.6 support has been dropped since it has reached end of life in Dec 2021.

- `qiskit.providers.ibmq.random`, the random number service which was used to access the CQC
  randomness extractor is no longer supported and has been removed.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_IBMQ_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The ``image`` keyword in the
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.run` method is
  deprecated. You should instead specify the image to use in the ``options``
  keyword.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes issue `#190 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibm-provider/issues/190>`__.
  Now :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeEncoder` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeDecoder` have been updated to handle
  instances of the `Instruction` class.

- Fixes issue `#74 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibm-provider/issues/74>`__
  where numpy ndarrays with object types could not be
  serialized. :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeEncoder` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeDecoder` have been updated
  to handle these ndarrays.

*************
Qiskit 0.35.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.20.0:

Terra 0.20.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/prepare-0.20-79918ed0fc5b496e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

The Qiskit Terra 0.20.0 release highlights are:

* The introduction of multithreaded modules written in Rust to accelerate
  the performance of certain portions of Qiskit Terra and improve scaling
  with larger numbers of qubits. However, when building Qiskit from source a
  `Rust <https://www.rust-lang.org/>`__ compiler is now required.

* More native support for working with a :class:`~.Target` in the transpiler.
  Several passes now support working directly with a :class:`~.Target` object
  which makes the transpiler robust in the types of backends it can target.

* The introduction of the :mod:`qiskit.primitives` module. These APIs
  provide different abstraction levels for computing outputs of interest from
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` and using backends. For
  example, the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BaseEstimator` defines an abstract
  interface for estimating an expectation value of an observable.
  This can then be used to construct higher level algorithms and applications
  that are built using the estimation of expectation values without having
  to worry about the implementation of computing the expectation value.
  This decoupling allows the implementation to improve in speed and quality
  while adhering to the defined abstract interface.
  Likewise, the :class:`~qiskit.primitives.BaseSampler` computes
  quasi-probability distributions from circuit measurements. Other primitives will
  be introduced in the future.

This release no longer has support for Python 3.6. With this release,
Python 3.7 through Python 3.10 are required.


.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/Operator-from_circuit-25b20d4b3ad5c398.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new constructor method for the :class:`.Operator` class,
  :meth:`.Operator.from_circuit` for creating a new :class:`.Operator`
  object from a :class:`.QuantumCircuit`. While this was possible normally
  using the default constructor, the :meth:`.Operator.from_circuit` method
  provides additional options to adjust how the operator is created. Primarily
  this lets you permute the qubit order based on a set :class:`.Layout`. For,
  example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit import transpile
    from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Operator

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(3)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.cx(1, 2)

    cmap = CouplingMap.from_line(3)
    out_circuit = transpile(circuit, initial_layout=[2, 1, 0], coupling_map=cmap)
    operator = Operator.from_circuit(out_circuit)

  the ``operator`` variable will have the qubits permuted based on the
  layout so that it is identical to what is returned by ``Operator(circuit)``
  before transpilation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/_copy_circuit_metadata-a9d03e699118dba2.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new method :meth:`.DAGCircuit.copy_empty_like`
  to the :class:`~.DAGCircuit` class. This method is used to create a new
  copy of an existing :class:`.DAGCircuit` object with the
  same structure but empty of any instructions. This method is the same as
  the private method ``_copy_circuit_metadata()``, but instead is now
  part of the public API of the class.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/access-backends-from-mock-d3897ecb8490219a.yaml @ None

- The fake backend and fake provider classes which were previously available
  in ``qiskit.test.mock`` are now also accessible in a new module:
  ``qiskit.providers.fake_provider``. This new module supersedes the previous
  module ``qiskit.test.mock`` which will be deprecated in Qiskit 0.21.0.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-linear-functions-904c8403ef7ab464.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new gate class, :class:`.LinearFunction`, that efficiently encodes
  a linear function (i.e. a function that can be represented by a sequence
  of :class:`.CXGate` and :class:`.SwapGate` gates).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-linear-functions-904c8403ef7ab464.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.CollectLinearFunctions` that collects
  blocks of consecutive :class:`.CXGate` and :class:`.SwapGate` gates in a
  circuit, and replaces each block with a :class:`.LinearFunction` gate.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-linear-functions-904c8403ef7ab464.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.LinearFunctionsSynthesis`
  that synthesizes any :class:`.LinearFunction` gates in using the
  `Patel-Markov-Hayes algorithm <https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0302002>`__.
  When combined with the :class:`.CollectLinearFunctions` transpiler pass
  this enables to collect blocks of consecutive :class:`.CXGate` and
  :class:`.SwapGate` gates in a circuit, and re-synthesize them using the
  `Patel-Markov-Hayes algorithm <https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0302002>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-linear-functions-904c8403ef7ab464.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.LinearFunctionsToPermutations` that
  replaces a :class:`.LinearFunction` gate by a :class:`.Permutation` circuit
  whenever possible.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-nested-conditionals-pass-manager-db7b8b9874018d0d.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- :class:`~.FlowController` classes (such as :class:`~.ConditionalController`)
  can now be nested inside a :class:`~.PassManager` instance when using the
  :meth:`.PassManager.append` method. This enables the use of nested logic to
  control the execution of passes in the :class:`~.PassManager`. For example::

      from qiskit.transpiler import ConditionalController, PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import (
        BasisTranslator, GatesInBasis, Optimize1qGatesDecomposition, FixedPoint, Depth
      )
      from qiskit.circuit.equivalence_library import SessionEquivalenceLibrary as sel

      pm = PassManager()

      def opt_control(property_set):
          return not property_set["depth_fixed_point"]

      def unroll_condition(property_set):
          return not property_set["all_gates_in_basis"]

      depth_check = [Depth(), FixedPoint("depth")]
      opt = [Optimize1qGatesDecomposition(['rx', 'ry', 'rz', 'rxx'])]
      unroll = [BasisTranslator(sel, ['rx', 'ry', 'rz', 'rxx'])]
      unroll_check = [GatesInBasis(['rx', 'ry', 'rz', 'rxx'])]
      flow_unroll = [ConditionalController(unroll, condition=unroll_condition)]

      pm.append(depth_check + opt + unroll_check + flow_unroll, do_while=opt_control)

  The ``pm`` :class:`~.PassManager` object will only execute the
  :class:`.BasisTranslator` pass (in the ``unroll`` step) in each loop
  iteration if the ``unroll_condition`` is met.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-parameter-prefix-support-to-ZFeatureMap-ZZFeatureMap-ba13832b9a832e88.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The constructors for the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZFeatureMap` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZZFeatureMap` classes have a new keyword
  argument ``parameter_prefix``. This new argument is used to set the prefix
  of parameters of the data encoding circuit. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import ZFeatureMap

      feature_map = ZFeatureMap(feature_dimension=4, parameter_prefix="my_prefix")
      feature_map.decompose().draw('mpl')

  the generated :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZFeatureMap` circuit has
  prefixed all its internal parameters with the prefix ``"my_prefix"``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-parameters-to-template-substitution-a1379cdbfcc10b5c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`.TemplateOptimization` transpiler pass can now work
  with :class:`~.Gate` objects that have :class:`.ParameterExpression`
  parameters. An illustrative example of using :class:`.Parameter`\s
  with :class:`.TemplateOptimization` is the following::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile, schedule
    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import TemplateOptimization

    # New contributions to the template optimization
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes.calibration import RZXCalibrationBuilder, rzx_templates

    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeCasablanca
    backend = FakeCasablanca()

    phi = Parameter('')

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    qc.p(2*phi, 1)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    print('Original circuit:')
    print(qc)

    pass_ = TemplateOptimization(**rzx_templates.rzx_templates(['zz2']))
    qc_cz = PassManager(pass_).run(qc)
    print('ZX based circuit:')
    print(qc_cz)

    # Add the calibrations
    pass_ = RZXCalibrationBuilder(backend)
    cal_qc = PassManager(pass_).run(qc_cz.bind_parameters({phi: 0.12}))

    # Transpile to the backend basis gates
    cal_qct = transpile(cal_qc, backend)
    qct = transpile(qc.bind_parameters({phi: 0.12}), backend)

    # Compare the schedule durations
    print('Duration of schedule with the calibration:')
    print(schedule(cal_qct, backend).duration)
    print('Duration of standard with two CNOT gates:')
    print(schedule(qct, backend).duration)

  outputs

  .. parsed-literal::

    Original circuit:

    q_0: 
         
    q_1:  X  P(2*)  X 
         
    ZX based circuit:
                                                         
    q_0: 0            
           Rzx(2.0*) 
    q_1:  Rz(-/2)  Rx(-/2)  Rz(-/2) 1             Rx(-2*) 
         
    
    q_0: 
         
    q_1:  Rz(-/2)  Rx(-/2)  Rz(-/2)  P(2.0*) 
         
    Duration of schedule with the calibration:
    1600
    Duration of standard with two CNOT gates:
    6848

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-repr-for-dag-nodes-2d0a95fecd3dd3db.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`.DAGOpNode`, :class:`.DAGInNode` and :class:`.DAGOutNode`
  classes now define a custom ``__repr__`` method which outputs a
  representation. Per the
  `Python documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#repr>`__
  the output is a string representation that is roughly equivalent to the
  Python string used to create an equivalent object.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-sparsepauliop-equiv-7a8a1420117dba21.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The performance of the :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.simplify` method has
  greatly improved by replacing the use of ``numpy.unique`` to compute unique
  elements of an array by a new similar function implemented in Rust that
  doesn't pre-sort the array.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-sparsepauliop-equiv-7a8a1420117dba21.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new method :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.equiv` to the
  :class:`~.SparsePauliOp` class for testing the equivalence of a
  :class:`~.SparsePauliOp` with another :class:`.SparsePauliOp` object.
  Unlike the ``==`` operator which compares operators element-wise,
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.equiv` compares whether two
  operators are equivalent or not. For example::

      op = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("X", 1), ("Y", 1)])
      op2 = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("X", 1), ("Y", 1), ("Z", 0)])
      op3 = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("Y", 1), ("X", 1)])

      print(op == op2)  # False
      print(op == op3)  # False
      print(op.equiv(op2))  # True
      print(op.equiv(op3))  # True

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-v2-mocked-backend-4ca2e4cfdf077c60.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added new fake backend classes from snapshots of the IBM Quantum systems
  based on the :class:`~.BackendV2` interface and provided a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` for each backend. :class:`~.BackendV2`
  based versions of all the existing backends are added except for three old
  backends ``FakeRueschlikon``, ``FakeTenerife`` and ``FakeTokyo`` as they
  do not have snapshots files available which are required for creating
  a new fake backend class based on :class:`~.BackendV2`.

  These new V2 fake backends will enable testing and development of new
  features introduced by :class:`~qiskit.providers.backend.BackendV2` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` such as improving the transpiler.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-xxminusyy-gate-63e6530c23500de9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new gate class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XXMinusYYGate`
  to the circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`) for the XX-YY
  interaction. This gate can be used to implement the
  `bSwap gate <https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.1287>`__ and its powers. It also
  arises in the simulation of superconducting fermionic models.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-xy-gate-e3ac32084273136a.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added new gate class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XXPlusYYGate`, to
  the circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`). This gate is a
  2-qubit parameterized XX+YY interaction, also known as an XY gate, and is
  based on the gate described in https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04424.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/bogota-manila-rome-santiago-as-fakepulsebackends-2907dec149997a27.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The ``FakeBogota``, ``FakeManila``, ``FakeRome``, and ``FakeSantiago`` fake
  backends which can be found in the ``qiskit.providers.fake_provider`` module can now be
  used as backends in Pulse experiments as they now include a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` created from a snapshot of
  the equivalent IBM Quantum machine's properties.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/consolidate-blocks-target-aware-6482e65d6ee2d18c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ConsolidateBlocks` pass has a new
  keyword argument on its constructor, ``target``. This argument is used to
  specify a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object representing the
  compilation target for the pass. If it is specified it supersedes the
  ``basis_gates`` kwarg. If a target is specified, the pass will respect the
  gates and qubits for the instructions defined in the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` when deciding which gates to consolidate
  into a unitary.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/consolidate-blocks-target-aware-6482e65d6ee2d18c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` class has a new method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target.instruction_supported` which is used
  to query the target to see if an instruction (the combination of an
  operation and the qubit(s) it is executed on) is supported on the backend
  modelled by the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/custom-serializers-qpy-0097ab79f239fcfc.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new kwarg, ``metadata_serializer``, to the
  :func:`.qpy.dump` function for specifying a custom
  ``JSONEncoder`` subclass for use when serializing the
  :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.metadata` attribute and a dual kwarg
  ``metadata_deserializer`` to the :func:`.qpy.load` function
  for specifying a ``JSONDecoder`` subclass. By default the
  :func:`~qiskit.qpy.dump` and
  :func:`~qiskit.qpy.load` functions will attempt to
  JSON serialize and deserialize with the stdlib default json encoder and
  decoder. Since :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.metadata` can contain any Python
  dictionary, even those with contents not JSON serializable by the default
  encoder, will lead to circuits that can't be serialized. The new
  ``metadata_serializer`` argument for
  :func:`~qiskit.qpy.dump` enables users to specify a
  custom ``JSONEncoder`` that will be used with the internal ``json.dump()``
  call for  serializing the :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.metadata` dictionary. This
  can then be paired with the new ``metadata_deserializer`` argument of the
  :func:`.qpy.load` function to decode those custom JSON
  encodings. If ``metadata_serializer`` is specified on
  :func:`~qiskit.qpy.dump` but ``metadata_deserializer``
  is not specified on :func:`~qiskit.qpy.load` calls
  the QPY will be loaded, but the circuit metadata may not be reconstructed
  fully.

  For example if you wanted to define a custom serialization for metadata and
  then load it you can do something like::

      from qiskit.qpy import dump, load
      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Parameter
      import json
      import io

      class CustomObject:
          """Custom string container object."""

          def __init__(self, string):
              self.string = string

          def __eq__(self, other):
              return self.string == other.string

      class CustomSerializer(json.JSONEncoder):
          """Custom json encoder to handle CustomObject."""

          def default(self, o):
              if isinstance(o, CustomObject):
                  return {"__type__": "Custom", "value": o.string}
              return json.JSONEncoder.default(self, o)

      class CustomDeserializer(json.JSONDecoder):
          """Custom json decoder to handle CustomObject."""

          def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
              super().__init__(*args, object_hook=self.object_hook, **kwargs)

          def object_hook(self, o):
              """Hook to override default decoder."""
              if "__type__" in o:
                  obj_type = o["__type__"]
                  if obj_type == "Custom":
                      return CustomObject(o["value"])
              return o

      theta = Parameter("theta")
      qc = QuantumCircuit(2, global_phase=theta)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.measure_all()
      circuits = [qc, qc.copy()]
      circuits[0].metadata = {"key": CustomObject("Circuit 1")}
      circuits[1].metadata = {"key": CustomObject("Circuit 2")}
      with io.BytesIO() as qpy_buf:
          dump(circuits, qpy_buf, metadata_serializer=CustomSerializer)
          qpy_buf.seek(0)
          new_circuits = load(qpy_buf, metadata_deserializer=CustomDeserializer)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/dense-layout-target-aware-2b330ccee948d31a.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DenseLayout` pass has a new keyword
  argument on its constructor, ``target``. This argument is used to specify a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object representing the compilation
  target for the pass. If it is specified it supersedes the other arguments
  on the constructor, ``coupling_map`` and ``backend_prop``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/dense-layout-target-aware-2b330ccee948d31a.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` class has a new method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target.operation_names_for_qargs`. This method is
  used to get the operation names (i.e. lookup key in the target) for the
  operations on a given ``qargs`` tuple.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/dynamical-decoupling-with-alignment-9c1e5ee909eab0f7.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- A new pass :class:`~.DynamicalDecouplingPadding` has been added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. This new pass supersedes the
  existing :class:`~.DynamicalDecoupling` pass to work with the new
  scheduling workflow in the transpiler. It is a subclass of the
  :class:`~.BasePadding` pass and depends on having scheduling and alignment
  analysis passes run prior to it in a :class:`~.PassManager`.
  This new pass can take a ``pulse_alignment`` argument which represents a
  hardware constraint for waveform start timing. The spacing between gates
  comprising a dynamical decoupling sequence is now adjusted to satisfy this
  constraint so that the circuit can be executed on hardware with the constraint.
  This value is usually found in :attr:`.BackendConfiguration.timing_constraints`.
  Additionally the pass also has an ``extra_slack_distribution`` option has been
  to control how to distribute the extra slack when the duration of the
  created dynamical decoupling sequence is shorter than the idle time of your circuit
  that you want to fill with the sequence. This defaults to ``middle`` which is
  identical to conventional behavior. The new strategy ``split_edges``
  evenly divide the extra slack into the beginning and end of the sequence,
  rather than adding it to the interval in the middle of the sequence.
  This might result in better noise cancellation especially when ``pulse_alignment`` > 1.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/expose-tolerances-z2symmetries-9c444a7b1237252e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.Z2Symmetries` class now exposes
  the threshold tolerances used to chop small real and imaginary parts of
  coefficients. With this one can control how the coefficients of the tapered
  operator are simplified. For example::

      from qiskit.opflow import Z2Symmetries
      from qiskit.quantum_info import Pauli

      z2_symmetries = Z2Symmetries(
          symmetries=[Pauli("IIZI"), Pauli("IZIZ"), Pauli("ZIII")],
          sq_paulis=[Pauli("IIXI"), Pauli("IIIX"), Pauli("XIII")],
          sq_list=[1, 0, 3],
          tapering_values=[1, -1, -1],
          tol=1e-10,
      )

  By default, coefficients are chopped with a tolerance of ``tol=1e-14``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/expose-tolerances-z2symmetries-9c444a7b1237252e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.chop` method to the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` class that truncates real and
  imaginary parts of coefficients individually. This is different
  from the :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.simplify` method which
  removes a coefficient only if the absolute value is close to 0. For
  example::

      >>> from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
      >>> op = SparsePauliOp(["X", "Y", "Z"], coeffs=[1+1e-17j, 1e-17+1j, 1e-17])
      >>> op.simplify()
      SparsePauliOp(['X', 'Y'],
                    coeffs=[1.e+00+1.e-17j, 1.e-17+1.e+00j])
      >>> op.chop()
      SparsePauliOp(['X', 'Y'],
                    coeffs=[1.+0.j, 0.+1.j])

  Note that the chop method does not accumulate the coefficents of the same Paulis, e.g.

  .. code-block::

      >>> op = SparsePauliOp(["X", "X"], coeffs=[1+1e-17j, 1e-17+1j)
      >>> op.chop()
      SparsePauliOp(['X', 'X'],
                    coeffs=[1.+0.j, 0.+1.j])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/gates_in_basis_target_aware-9bcd698adc3ecc28.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new kwarg, ``target``, to the constructor for the
  :class:`.GatesInBasis` transpiler pass. This new argument can be used to
  optionally specify a :class:`.Target` object that represents the backend.
  When set this :class:`.Target` will be used for determining whether
  a :class:`.DAGCircuit` contains gates outside the basis set and the
  ``basis_gates`` argument will not be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/ibm-cpu-arch-support-3289377f3834f29e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added partial support for running on ppc64le and s390x Linux platforms.
  This release will start publishing pre-compiled binaries for ppc64le and
  s390x Linux platforms on all Python versions. However, unlike other
  supported platforms not all of Qiskit's upstream dependencies support these
  platforms yet. So a C/C++ compiler may be required to build and install
  these dependencies and a simple ``pip install qiskit-terra`` with just a
  working Python environment will not be sufficient to install Qiskit.
  Additionally, these same constraints prevent us from testing the
  pre-compiled wheels before publishing them, so the same guarantees around
  platform support that exist for the other platforms don't apply here.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/imag_gradients-3dabcd11343062a8.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.opflow.gradients.Gradient` and
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.gradients.QFI` classes can now calculate the imaginary
  part of expectation value gradients. When using a different measurement basis,
  i.e. ``-Y`` instead of ``Z``, we can measure the imaginary part of gradients
  The measurement basis can be set with the ``aux_meas_op`` argument.

  For the gradients, ``aux_meas_op = Z`` computes ``0.5Re[(()|)O()|d()]``
  and ``aux_meas_op = -Y`` computes ``0.5Im[(()|)O()|d()]``.
  For the QFIs, ``aux_meas_op = Z`` computes ``4Re[(d<()|)(d|())]``
  and ``aux_meas_op = -Y`` computes ``4Im[(d<()|)(d|())]``.
  For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumRegister, QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.opflow import CircuitStateFn, Y
    from qiskit.opflow.gradients.circuit_gradients import LinComb
    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    a = Parameter("a")
    b = Parameter("b")
    params = [a, b]

    q = QuantumRegister(1)
    qc = QuantumCircuit(q)
    qc.h(q)
    qc.rz(params[0], q[0])
    qc.rx(params[1], q[0])
    op = CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.0)

    aux_meas_op = -Y

    prob_grad = LinComb(aux_meas_op=aux_meas_op).convert(operator=op, params=params)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/instruction-durations-8d98369f89b48279.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~.InstructionDurations` class now has support for working
  with parameters of an instruction. Each entry in an
  :class:`~.InstructionDurations` object now consists of a tuple of
  ``(inst_name, qubits, duration, parameters, unit)``. This enables an
  :class:`~.InstructionDurations` to define durations for an instruction
  given a certain parameter value to account for different durations with
  different parameter values on an instruction that takes a numeric parameter.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/iqx-dark-3dd0a500e1801673.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new value for the ``style`` keyword argument on the circuit drawer
  function :func:`~.circuit_drawer` and :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method,
  ``iqx_dark``. When ``style`` is set to ``iqx_dark`` with the ``mpl`` drawer
  backend, the output visualization will use a color scheme similar to the
  the dark mode color scheme used by the IBM Quantum composer. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from matplotlib.pyplot import show

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.h(0)
      circuit.cx(0, 1)
      circuit.p(0.2, 1)

      circuit.draw("mpl", style="iqx-dark")

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/lazy-dependency-checkers-d1f3ce7a14383484.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Several lazy dependency checkers have been added to the new module
  :mod:`qiskit.utils.optionals`, which can be used to query if certain Qiskit
  functionality is available.  For example, you can ask if Qiskit has detected
  the presence of ``matplotlib`` by asking
  ``if qiskit.utils.optionals.HAS_MATPLOTLIB``.  These objects only attempt to
  import their dependencies when they are queried, so you can use them in
  runtime code without affecting import time.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/lazy-dependency-checkers-d1f3ce7a14383484.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Import time for :mod:`qiskit` has been significantly improved, especially
  for those with many of Qiskit Terra's optional dependencies installed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/marginal_counts_act_on_memory-0a9b58d0b95046dd.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :func:`~.marginal_counts` function now supports marginalizing the
  ``memory`` field of an input :class:`~.Result` object. For example, if
  the input ``result``  argument is a qiskit :class:`~.Result` object
  obtained from a 4-qubit measurement we can marginalize onto the first qubit
  with::

      print(result.results[0].data.memory)
      marginal_result = marginal_counts(result, [0])
      print(marginal_result.results[0].data.memory)

  The output is::

      ['0x0', '0x1', '0x2', '0x3', '0x4', '0x5', '0x6', '0x7']
      ['0x0', '0x1', '0x0', '0x1', '0x0', '0x1', '0x0', '0x1']

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/multithreaded-stochastic-swap-6c2f13d7bd566284.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The internals of the :class:`.StochasticSwap` algorithm have been reimplemented
  to be multithreaded and are now written in the
  `Rust <https://www.rust-lang.org/>`__ programming language instead of Cython.
  This significantly increases the run time performance of the compiler pass
  and by extension :func:`~.transpile` when run with ``optimization_level`` 0,
  1, and 2. By default the pass will use up to the number of logical CPUs on your
  local system but you can control the number of threads used by the pass by setting
  the ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable to an integer value. For example,
  setting ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS=4`` will run the :class:`.StochasticSwap` with 4
  threads.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/multithreaded-stochastic-swap-6c2f13d7bd566284.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- A new environment variable ``QISKIT_FORCE_THREADS`` is available for users to
  directly control whether potentially multithreaded portions of Qiskit's code
  will run in multiple threads. Currently this is only used by the
  :class:`~.StochasticSwap` transpiler pass but it likely will be used other
  parts of Qiskit in the future. When this env variable is set to ``TRUE`` any
  multithreaded code in Qiskit Terra will always use multiple threads regardless
  of any other runtime conditions that might have otherwise caused the function
  to use a single threaded variant. For example, in :class:`~.StochasticSwap` if
  the pass is being run as part of a :func:`~.transpile` call with > 1 circuit
  that is being executed in parallel with ``multiprocessing`` via
  :func:`~.parallel_map` the :class:`~.StochasticSwap` will not use multiple
  threads to avoid potentially oversubscribing CPU resources. However, if you'd
  like to use multiple threads in the pass along with multiple processes you
  can set ``QISKIT_FORCE_THREADS=TRUE``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/new-fake-backends-04ea9cb26374e385.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- New fake backend classes are available under ``qiskit.providers.fake_provider``. These
  include mocked versions of ``ibm_cairo``, ``ibm_hanoi``,
  ``ibmq_kolkata``, ``ibm_nairobi``, and ``ibm_washington``. As with the other fake backends,
  these include snapshots of calibration and error data taken from the real
  system, and can be used for local testing, compilation and simulation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/new-state-preparation-class-f8c0617a0c988f12.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Introduced a new class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.StatePreparation`.
  This class allows users to prepare a desired state in the same fashion as
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize` without the reset being
  automatically applied.

  For example, to prepare a qubit in the state :math:`(|0\rangle - |1\rangle) / \sqrt{2}`::

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
      circuit.prepare_state([1/np.sqrt(2), -1/np.sqrt(2)], 0)
      circuit.draw()

  The output is as::

            
       q_0:  State Preparation(0.70711,-0.70711) 
            

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/optimization-u2-gates-with-parameters-322b6c523251108c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`.Optimize1qGates` transpiler pass now has support for optimizing :class:`.U1Gate`,
  :class:`.U2Gate`, and :class:`.PhaseGate` gates with unbound parameters in a circuit.
  Previously, if these gates had unbound parameters the pass would not use them. For example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import Optimize1qGates, Unroller

      phi = Parameter('')
      alpha = Parameter('')

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
      qc.u1(2*phi, 0)
      qc.u1(alpha, 0)
      qc.u1(0.1, 0)
      qc.u1(0.2, 0)

      pm = PassManager([Unroller(['u1', 'cx']), Optimize1qGates()])
      nqc = pm.run(qc)

  will be combined to the circuit with only one single-qubit gate::

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
      qc.u1(2*phi + alpha + 0.3, 0)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/pauli_evolve_clifford-3885e8d7d8e8b424.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The methods :meth:`.Pauli.evolve` and :meth:`.PauliList.evolve`
  now have a new keyword argument, ``frame``, which is used to
  perform an evolution of a Pauli by a Clifford. If ``frame='h'`` (default)
  then it does the Heisenberg picture evolution of a Pauli by a Clifford
  (:math:`P' = C^\dagger P C`), and if ``frame='s'`` then it does the
  Schrdinger picture evolution of a Pauli by a Clifford
  (:math:`P' = C P C^\dagger`). The latter option yields a faster calculation,
  and is also useful in certain cases. This new option makes the calculation
  of the greedy Clifford decomposition method in :class:`.decompose_clifford`
  significantly faster.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/primitives-fb4515ec0f4cbd8e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new module to Qiskit: :mod:`qiskit.primitives`. The primitives
  module is where APIs are defined which provide different
  abstractions around computing certain common functions from
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit`s. The concept behind a primitive is to provide a higher
  level object that can be used to perform common computations using a given
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` which abstracts away the details of the underlying
  execution on a :class:`~Backend`. This enables higher level algorithms and
  applications to concentrate on performing the computation and not need to
  worry about the execution and processing of results and have a standardized
  interface for common computations. For example, estimating an expectation
  value of a quantum circuit and observable can be performed by any class
  implementing the :class:`~.BaseEstimator` class and consumed in a
  standardized manner regardless of the underlying implementation.
  Applications can then be written using the primitive interface directly.


  To start the module contains two types of primitives,
  the :class:`~.Sampler` (see :class:`~.BaseSampler` for the abstract
  class definition) and :class:`~.Estimator` (see :class:`~.BaseEstimator`
  for the abstract class definition). Reference implementations are included
  in the :mod:`qiskit.primitives` module and are built using the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module which perform ideal simulation of
  primitive operation. The expectation is that provider packages will offer
  their own implementations of these interfaces for providers which can
  efficiently implement the protocol natively (typically using a classical
  runtime). Additionally, in the future for providers which do not offer a
  native implementation of the primitives a method will be provided which
  will enable constructing primitive objects from a :class:`~.Backend`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/qpy-module-c2ff2cc086b52fc6.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new module, :mod:`qiskit.qpy`, which contains the functionality
  previously exposed in :mod:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization`. The public
  functions previously exposed at :mod:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization`,
  :func:`~qiskit.qpy.dump` and :func:`~qiskit.qpy.load` are now available
  from this new module (although they are still accessible from
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` but this will be deprecated in
  a future release). This new module was added in the interest of the future
  direction of the QPY file format, which in future versions will support
  representing :mod:`~qiskit.pulse` :class:`~.Schedule` and
  :class:`~.ScheduleBlock` objects in addition to the
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` objects it supports today.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/qubit-properties-target-6b1fb155a46cb942.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new attribute, :attr:`~.Target.qubit_properties` to the
  :class:`~.Target` class. This attribute contains a list of
  :class:`~.QubitProperties` objects for each qubit in the target.
  For example::

      target.qubit_properties[2]

  will contain the :class:`~.QubitProperties` for qubit number 2 in the
  target.

  For :class:`~.BackendV2` authors, if you were previously defining
  :class:`~.QubitProperties` directly on your :class:`~.BackendV2`
  implementation by overriding :meth:`.BackendV2.qubit_properties` this
  will still work fine. However, if you do move the definition to the
  underlying :class:`~.Target` object and remove the specialized
  :meth:`.BackendV2.qubit_properties` implementation which will enable
  using qubit properties in the transpiler and also maintain API compatibility
  with your previous implementation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/refactor-aux-operators-79d790f8a693a7c0.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a  new function, :func:`qiskit.algorithms.eval_observables`, which is
  used to evaluate observables given a bound
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. It originates from a private
  method, ``_eval_aux_ops()``, of the :class:`qiskit.algorithms.VQE` class but
  the new :func:`~qiskit.algorithms.eval_observables` function is now more
  general so that it can be used in other algorithms, for example time
  evolution algorithms.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rework-basis-translator-a83dc46cbc71c3b1.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The basis search strategy in :class:`~.BasisTranslator` transpiler pass
  has been modified into a variant of Dijkstra search which greatly improves
  the runtime performance of the pass when attempting to target an unreachable
  basis.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rust-denselayout-bc0f08874ad778d6.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~.DenseLayout` transpiler pass is now multithreaded, which
  greatly improves the runtime performance of the pass. By default, it will
  use the number of logical CPUs on your local system, but you can control
  the number of threads used by the pass by setting the
  ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable to an integer value. For
  example, setting ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS=4`` will run the
  :class:`~.DenseLayout` pass with 4 threads.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rust-pauli-expval-f2aa06c5bab85768.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The internal computations of :meth:`.Statevector.expectation_value` and
  :meth:`.DensityMatrix.expectation_value` methods have been reimplemented
  in the Rust programming language. This new implementation is multithreaded
  and by default for a :class:`~.Statevector` or :class:`~.DensityMatrix`
  >= 19 qubits will spawn a thread pool with the number of logical CPUs
  available on the local system. You can you can control the number of
  threads used by setting the ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable to
  an integer value. For example, setting ``RAYON_NUM_THREADS=4`` will only
  use 4 threads in the thread pool.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/sparsepauliop-from-index-list-4660fdaa492cd8b2.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.from_sparse_list` constructor that takes
  an iterable, where the elements represent Pauli terms that are themselves
  sparse, so that ``"XIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIX"`` can now be written as
  ``("XX", [0, 16])``. For example, the operator

  .. math::

    H = X_0 Z_3 + 2 Y_1 Y_4

  can now be constructed as

  .. code-block:: python

    op = SparsePauliOp.from_sparse_list([("XZ", [0, 3], 1), ("YY", [1, 4], 2)], num_qubits=5)
    # or equivalently, as previously
    op = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("IZIIX", 1), ("YIIYI", 2)])

  This facilitates the construction of very sparse operators on many qubits,
  as is often the case for Ising Hamiltonians.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/unitary-synth-target-aware-eac86b1faa2d71fd.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis` transpiler pass has
  a new keyword argument on its constructor, ``target``. This can be used to
  optionally specify a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object which
  represents the compilation target for the pass. When it's specified it will
  supersede the values set for ``basis_gates``, ``coupling_map``, and
  ``backend_props``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/unitary-synth-target-aware-eac86b1faa2d71fd.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.plugin.UnitarySynthesisPlugin`
  abstract plugin class has a new optional attribute implementations can add,
  :attr:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.plugin.UnitarySynthesisPlugin.supports_target`.
  If a plugin has this attribute set to ``True`` a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target`
  object will be passed in the ``options`` payload under the ``target`` field. The
  expectation is that this :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object will be used
  in place of ``coupling_map``, ``gate_lengths``, ``basis_gates``, and ``gate_errors``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-instruction-alignment-passes-ef0f20d4f89f95f3.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Introduced a new transpiler pass workflow for building :class:`~.PassManager` objects
  for scheduling :class:`~.QuantumCircuit` objects in the transpiler. In the new
  workflow scheduling and alignment passes are all :class:`~.AnalysisPass` objects that
  only update the property set of the pass manager, specifically new property set item
  ``node_start_time``, which holds the absolute start time of each opnode. A separate
  :class:`~.TransformationPass` such as :class:`~.PadDelay` is subsequently used
  to apply scheduling to the DAG. This new workflow is both more efficient and can
  correct for additional timing constraints exposed by a backend.

  Previously, the pass chain would have been implemented as ``scheduling -> alignment``
  which were both transform passes thus there were multiple :class:`~.DAGCircuit`
  instances recreated during each pass. In addition, scheduling occured in each pass
  to obtain instruction start time. Now the required pass chain becomes
  ``scheduling -> alignment -> padding`` where the :class:`~.DAGCircuit` update only
  occurs at the end with the ``padding`` pass.

  For those who are creating custom :class:`~.PassManager` objects that involve
  circuit scheduling you will need to adjust your :class:`~.PassManager`
  to insert one of the :class:`~.BasePadding` passes (currently
  either :class:`~.PadDelay` or :class:`~.PadDynamicalDecoupling` can be used)
  at the end of the scheduling pass chain. Without the padding pass the scheduling
  passes will not be reflected in the output circuit of the :meth:`~.PassManager.run`
  method of your custom :class:`~.PassManager`.

  For example, if you were previously building your :class:`~.PassManager`
  with something like::

      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import TimeUnitConversion, ALAPSchedule, ValidatePulseGates, AlignMeasures

      pm = PassManager()
      scheduling = [
          ALAPSchedule(instruction_durations), PadDelay()),
          ValidatePulseGates(granularity=timing_constraints.granularity, min_length=timing_constraints.min_length),
          AlignMeasures(alignment=timing_constraints.acquire_alignment),
      ]
      pm.append(scheduling)

  you can instead use::

      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import TimeUnitConversion, ALAPScheduleAnalysis, ValidatePulseGates, AlignMeasures, PadDelay

      pm = PassManager()
      scheduling = [
          ALAPScheduleAnalysis(instruction_durations), PadDelay()),
          ConstrainedReschedule(acquire_alignment=timing_constraints.acquire_alignment, pulse_alignment=timing_constraints.pulse_alignment),
          ValidatePulseGates(granularity=timing_constraints.granularity, min_length=timing_constraints.min_length),
          PadDelay()
      ]
      pm.append(scheduling)

  which will both be more efficient and also align instructions based on any hardware constraints.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-instruction-alignment-passes-ef0f20d4f89f95f3.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`~.ConstrainedReschedule` pass.
  The :class:`~.ConstrainedReschedule` pass considers both hardware
  alignment constraints that can be definied in a :class:`.BackendConfiguration`
  object, ``pulse_alignment`` and ``acquire_alignment``. This new class supersedes
  the previosuly existing :class:`~.AlignMeasures` as it performs the same alignment
  (via the property set) for measurement instructions in addition to general instruction
  alignment. By setting the ``acquire_alignment`` constraint argument for the
  :class:`~.ConstrainedReschedule` pass it is a drop-in replacement of
  :class:`~.AlignMeasures` when paired with a new :class:`~.BasePadding` pass.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-instruction-alignment-passes-ef0f20d4f89f95f3.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added two new transpiler passes :class:`~.ALAPScheduleAnalysis` and :class:`~.ASAPScheduleAnalysis`
  which superscede the :class:`~.ALAPSchedule` and :class:`~.ASAPSchedule` as part of the
  reworked transpiler workflow for schedling. The new passes perform the same scheduling but
  in the property set and relying on a :class:`~.BasePadding` pass to adjust the circuit
  based on all the scheduling alignment analysis.

  The standard behavior of these passes also aligns timing ordering with the topological
  ordering of the DAG nodes. This change may affect the scheduling outcome if it includes
  conditional operations, or simultaneously measuring two qubits with the same classical
  register (edge-case).     To reproduce conventional behavior, set ``clbit_write_latency``
  identical to the measurement instruction length.

  For example, consider scheduling an input circuit like:

  .. parsed-literal::

         
    q_0:  X M
            
    q_1:  X 
                      
    q_2: M
                
    c: 1/ c_0=0x1 
               0  0


  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.transpiler import InstructionDurations, PassManager
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ALAPScheduleAnalysis, PadDelay, SetIOLatency
    from qiskit.visualization.timeline import draw

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(3, 1)
    circuit.x(0)
    circuit.measure(0, 0)
    circuit.x(1).c_if(0, 1)
    circuit.measure(2, 0)

    durations = InstructionDurations([("x", None, 160), ("measure", None, 800)])

    pm = PassManager(
        [
          SetIOLatency(clbit_write_latency=800, conditional_latency=0),
          ALAPScheduleAnalysis(durations),
          PadDelay(),
        ]
    )
    draw(pm.run(circuit))

  As you can see in the timeline view, the measurement on ``q_2`` starts before
  the conditional X gate on the ``q_1``, which seems to be opposite to the
  topological ordering of the node. This is also expected behavior
  because clbit write-access happens at the end edge of the measure instruction,
  and the read-access of the conditional gate happens the begin edge of the instruction.
  Thus topological ordering is preserved on the timeslot of the classical register,
  which is not captured by the timeline view.
  However, this assumes a paticular microarchitecture design, and the circuit is
  not necessary scheduled like this.

  By using the default configuration of passes, the circuit is schedule like below.

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.transpiler import InstructionDurations, PassManager
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ALAPScheduleAnalysis, PadDelay
    from qiskit.visualization.timeline import draw

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(3, 1)
    circuit.x(0)
    circuit.measure(0, 0)
    circuit.x(1).c_if(0, 1)
    circuit.measure(2, 0)

    durations = InstructionDurations([("x", None, 160), ("measure", None, 800)])

    pm = PassManager([ALAPScheduleAnalysis(durations), PadDelay()])
    draw(pm.run(circuit))

  Note that clbit is locked throughout the measurement instruction interval.
  This behavior is designed based on the Qiskit Pulse, in which the acquire instruction takes
  ``AcquireChannel`` and ``MemorySlot`` which are not allowed to overlap with other instructions,
  i.e. simultaneous memory access from the different instructions is prohibited.
  This also always aligns the timing ordering with the topological node ordering.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-instruction-alignment-passes-ef0f20d4f89f95f3.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`~.PadDynamicalDecoupling`
  which supersedes the :class:`~.DynamicalDecoupling` pass as part of the
  reworked transpiler workflow for scheduling. This new pass will insert dynamical decoupling
  sequences into the circuit per any scheduling and alignment analysis that occured in earlier
  passes.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-plot-gate-map-9ed6ad5490bafbbf.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :func:`~.plot_gate_map` visualization function and the functions built
  on top of it, :func:`~.plot_error_map` and :func:`~.plot_circuit_layout`,
  have a new keyword argument, ``qubit_coordinates``. This argument takes
  a sequence of 2D coordinates to use for plotting each qubit in the backend
  being visualized. If specified this sequence must have a length equal to
  the number of qubits on the backend and it will be used instead of the
  default behavior.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-plot-gate-map-9ed6ad5490bafbbf.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :func:`~.plot_gate_map` visualization function and the functions built
  on top of it, :func:`~.plot_error_map` and :func:`~.plot_circuit_layout`,
  now are able to plot any backend not just those with the number of qubits
  equal to one of the IBM backends. This relies on
  the retworkx ``spring_layout()``
  `function <https://qiskit.org/documentation/retworkx/apiref/retworkx.spring_layout.html>`__
  to generate the layout for the visualization. If the default layout doesn't
  work with a backend's particular coupling graph you can use the
  ``qubit_coordinates`` function to set a custom layout.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/update-plot-gate-map-9ed6ad5490bafbbf.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :func:`~.plot_gate_map` visualization function and the functions built
  on top of it, :func:`~.plot_error_map` and :func:`~.plot_circuit_layout`,
  are now able to function with a :class:`~.BackendV2` based backend.
  Previously, these functions only worked with :class:`~.BaseBackend` or
  :class:`~.BackendV1` based backends.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/upgrade-alap-asap-passes-bcacc0f1053c9828.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a new transpiler pass, :class:`~.SetIOLatency`. This pass takes two
  arguments ``clbit_write_latency`` and ``conditional_latency`` to define the
  I/O latency for classical bits and classical conditions on a backend. This
  pass will then define these values on the pass manager's property set to
  enable subsequent scheduling and alignment passes to correct for these
  latencies and provide a more presice scheduling output of a dynamic circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/upgrade-convert-scheduling-passes-to-analysis-04333b6fef524d21.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- A new transpiler pass :class:`.PadDelay` has been added. This pass fills
  idle time on the qubit wires with :class:`~.circuit.Delay` instructions.
  This pass is part of the new workflow for scheduling passes in the
  transpiler and depends on a scheduling analysis pass (such as
  :class:`~.ALAPScheduleAnalysis` or :class:`~ASAPScheduleAnalysis`) and
  any alignment passes (such as :class:`~.ConstrainedReschedule`) to be
  run prior to :class:`.PadDelay`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/vf2layout-target-51cc8f77fdfcde67.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~.VF2Layout` transpiler pass has a new keyword argument,
  ``target`` which is used to provide a :class:`~.Target` object for
  the pass. When specified, the :class:`~.Target` will be used by the
  pass for all information about the target device. If it is specified,
  the ``target`` option will take priority over the ``coupling_map`` and
  ``properties`` arguments.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/vqe-optimizer-callables-1aa14d78c855d383.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Allow callables as optimizers in :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` and
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.QAOA`. Now, the optimizer can either be one of Qiskit's optimizers,
  such as :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` or a callable with the following signature:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import OptimizerResult

      def my_optimizer(fun, x0, jac=None, bounds=None) -> OptimizerResult:
          # Args:
          #     fun (callable): the function to minimize
          #     x0 (np.ndarray): the initial point for the optimization
          #     jac (callable, optional): the gradient of the objective function
          #     bounds (list, optional): a list of tuples specifying the parameter bounds

          result = OptimizerResult()
          result.x = # optimal parameters
          result.fun = # optimal function value
          return result

  The above signature also allows to directly pass any SciPy minimizer, for instance as

  .. code-block:: python

      from functools import partial
      from scipy.optimize import minimize

      optimizer = partial(minimize, method="L-BFGS-B")


.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/multithreaded-stochastic-swap-6c2f13d7bd566284.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- When running :func:`.parallel_map` (which is done internally by
  performance sensitive functions such as :func:`.transpile` and
  :func:`.assemble`) in a subprocess launched outside of
  :func:`.parallel_map`, it is possible that the parallel dispatch performed
  inside :func:`.parallel_map` will hang and never return.
  This is due to upstream issues in CPython around the default
  method to launch subprocesses on Linux and macOS with Python 3.7 (see
  https://bugs.python.org/issue40379 for more details). If you
  encounter this, you have two options: you can either remove the nested
  parallel processes, as calling :func:`.parallel_map` from a main process
  should work fine; or you can manually call the CPython standard library
  ``multiprocessing`` module to perform similar parallel dispatch from a
  subprocess, but use the ``"spawn"`` or ``"forkserver"`` launch methods to
  avoid the potential to have things get stuck and never return.


.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/bit-slots-17d6649872da0440.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The classes :class:`.Qubit`, :class:`.Clbit` and :class:`.AncillaQubit` now
  have the ``__slots__`` attribute.  This is to reduce their memory usage.  As a
  side effect, they can no longer have arbitrary data attached as attributes
  to them.  This is very unlikely to have any effect on downstream code other
  than performance benefits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/bump-retworkx-0.11.0-97db170ae39cacf8.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The core dependency ``retworkx`` had its version requirement bumped to 0.11.0, up from 0.10.1.
  This improves the performance of transpilation pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ConsolidateBlocks`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/bump-symengine-8ca362f5b9fef199.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The minimum supported version of ``symengine`` is now 0.9.0. This was
  necessary to improve compatibility with Python's ``pickle`` module which
  is used internally as part of parallel dispatch with :func:`.parallel_map`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/bump-symengine-8ca362f5b9fef199.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The default value of ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` when running with Python 3.9 on
  Linux is now set to ``TRUE``. This means when running :func:`.parallel_map`
  or functions that call it internally, such as :func:`.transpile` and
  :func:`.assemble`, the function will be executed in multiple processes and
  should have better run time performance. This change was made because the
  issues with reliability of parallel dispatch appear to have been resolved
  (see `#6188 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6188>`__ for
  more details). If you still encounter issues because of this you can disable
  multiprocessing and revert to the previous default behavior by setting the
  ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` environment variable to ``FALSE``, or setting the
  ``parallel`` option to ``False`` in your user config file (also please file
  an issue so we can track any issues related to multiprocessing).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``MSGate`` gate class previously found in
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` has been removed. It was originally deprecated in the
  0.16.0 release. Instead the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GMS` class should be used, as
  this allows you to create an equivalent 2 qubit MS gate in addition to
  an ``MSGate`` for any number of qubits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``mirror()`` method of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction`
  class has been removed. It was originally deprecated in 0.15.0 release. Instead you should
  use :meth:`.Instruction.reverse_ops`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``num_ancilla_qubits()`` method of the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseLinearPauliRotations` and
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder` classes has been removed. It was originally
  deprecated in the 0.16.0 release. Instead the
  :meth:`.PiecewiseLinearPauliRotations.num_ancillas` and :meth:`.WeightedAdder.num_ancillas`
  methods should be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``reverse`` argument on the constructor for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations` class has been removed. It
  was originally deprecated in the 0.15.0 release. Instead you should use the
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` method to reverse the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations` circuit if needed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``angle`` argument on the constructors for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.C3SXGate` and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.C3XGate`
  gate classes has been removed. It was originally deprecated in the 0.17.0 release. Instead
  for fractional 3-controlled X gates you can use the :meth:`.C3XGate.power` method.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/cleanup-deprecated-circuitmeth-89edb244f572b754.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Support for using ``np.ndarray`` objects as part of the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.params` attribute
  of a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` object has been removed. This has been deprecated
  since Qiskit Terra 0.16.0 and now will no longer work. Instead one should create a new subclass
  of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` and explicitly allow a ``np.ndarray`` input by overloading the
  :meth:`~.Gate.validate_parameter` method.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/csp-layout-extra-b62a5e53f136534a.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- A new extra ``csp-layout-pass`` has been added to the install target for
  ``pip install qiskit-terra``, and is also included in the ``all`` extra.
  This has no effect in Qiskit Terra 0.20, but starting from Qiskit Terra 0.21,
  the dependencies needed only for the :class:`.CSPLayout` transpiler pass will
  be downgraded from requirements to optionals, and installed by this extra.
  You can prepare a package that depends on this pass by setting its
  requirements (or ``pip install`` command) to target
  ``qiskit-terra[csp-layout-pass]``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/drop-python3.6-support-45ecc9e1832934cd.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Support for running with Python 3.6 has been removed. To run Qiskit you need
  a minimum Python version of 3.7.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-algorithms-7f1b969e5b2447f9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~.AmplitudeEstimator` now inherits from the ``ABC`` class from
  the Python standard library. This requires any subclass to implement the
  :meth:`~.AmplitudeEstimator.estimate` method when previously it wasn't
  required. This was done because the original intent of the class was to
  always be a child class of ``ABC``, as the :meth:`~.AmplitudeEstimator.estimate`
  is required for the operation of an :class:`~.AmplitudeEstimator` object.
  However, if you were previously defining an :class:`~.AmplitudeEstimator`
  subclass that didn't implement :meth:`~.AmplitudeEstimator.estimate` this
  will now result in an error.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/lazy-dependency-checkers-d1f3ce7a14383484.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The error raised by :class:`.HoareOptimizer` if the optional dependency
  ``z3`` is not available has changed from :class:`.TranspilerError` to
  :class:`.MissingOptionalLibraryError` (which is both a :class:`.QiskitError`
  and an ``ImportError``).  This was done to be consistent with the other
  optional dependencies.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/manylinux2014-e33268fda54e12b1.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- On Linux, the minimum library support has been raised from the
  `manylinux2010 VM <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0571/>`__ to
  `manylinux2014 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0599/>`__.  This mirrors
  similar changes in Numpy and Scipy.  There should be no meaningful effect
  for most users, unless your system still contains a very old version of
  ``glibc``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/marginal_counts_act_on_memory-0a9b58d0b95046dd.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :func:`~.marginal_counts` function when called with a :class:`~.Result`
  object input, will now marginalize the ``memory`` field of experiment data
  if it's set in the input :class:`~.Result`. Previously, the ``memory`` field
  in the the input was not marginalized. This change was made because the previous
  behavior would result in the ``counts`` field not matching the ``memory``
  field after :func:`~.marginal_counts` was called. If the previous behavior
  is desired it can be restored by setting ``marginalize_memory=None`` as
  an argument to :func:`~.marginal_counts` which will not marginalize the
  ``memory`` field.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/multithreaded-stochastic-swap-6c2f13d7bd566284.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`.StochasticSwap` transpiler pass may return different results with
  the same seed value set. This is due to the internal rewrite of the transpiler
  pass to improve runtime performance. However, this means that if you ran
  :func:`~.transpile` with ``optimization_level`` 0, 1 (the default), or 2 with a
  value set for ``seed_transpiler`` you may get an output with different swap
  mapping present after upgrading to Qiskit Terra 0.20.0.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/multithreaded-stochastic-swap-6c2f13d7bd566284.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- To build Qiskit Terra from source a `Rust <https://www.rust-lang.org/>`__
  compiler is now needed. This is due to the internal rewrite of the
  :class:`.StochasticSwap` transpiler pass which greatly improves the runtime
  performance of the transpiler. The rust compiler can easily be installed
  using rustup, which can be found here: https://rustup.rs/

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/paulievo-classname-c0f002d519c45e42.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :attr:`~.PauliEvolutionGate.name` attribute of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` class has been changed
  to always be ``"PauliEvolution"``. This change was made to be consistent
  with other gates in Qiskit and enables other parts of Qiskit to quickly
  identify when a particular operation in a circuit is a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate`. For example,
  it enables the unrolling to Pauli evolution gates.

  Previously, the name contained the operators which are evolved, which is
  now available via the :attr:`.PauliEvolutionGate.label` attribute.
  If a circuit with a :class:`~.PauliEvolutionGate` is drawn, the gate will
  still show the same information, which gates are being evolved.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/remove-deprecated-algo-methods-eb101adf17a2b920.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated methods:

  * ``qiskit.algorithms.VQE.get_optimal_cost``
  * ``qiskit.algorithms.VQE.get_optimal_circuit``
  * ``qiskit.algorithms.VQE.get_optimal_vector``
  * ``qiskit.algorithms.VQE.optimal_params``
  * ``qiskit.algorithms.HamiltonianPhaseEstimationResult.most_likely_phase``
  * ``qiskit.algorithms.PhaseEstimationResult.most_likely_phase``

  which were originally deprecated in the Qiskit Terra 0.18.0 release have
  been removed and will no longer work.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/remove-deprecated-algo-methods-eb101adf17a2b920.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`qiskit.algorithms.VariationalAlgorithm` class is now defined
  as an abstract base class (``ABC``) which will require classes that inherit
  from it to define both a :attr:`.VariationalAlgorithm.initial_point` getter
  and setter method.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/remove-deprecated-pass-manager-dc1dddbd7dcd866f.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The ``pass_manager`` kwarg for the :func:`.transpile` function
  has been removed. It was originally deprecated in the 0.13.0 release.
  The preferred way to transpile a circuit with a custom
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` object is to use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run` method of the :class:`.PassManager`
  object.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/remove-parametrized-schedule-fc4b31a8180db9d9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previously deprecated ``ParametrizedSchedule`` class has been removed
  and no longer exists. This class was deprecated as a part of the 0.17.0
  release. Instead of using this class you can directly parametrize
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` or
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock` objects by specifying a
  :py:class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` object to the parametric pulse
  argument.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/remove_probability_distributions-d30bd77f0f2b9570.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The module ``qiskit.circuit.library.probability_distributions`` has been
  removed and no longer exists as per the deprecation notice from qiskit-terra
  0.17.0 (released Apr 1, 2021).  The affected classes are
  ``UniformDistribution``, ``NormalDistribution``, and
  ``LogNormalDistribution``. They are all moved to the
  `qiskit-finance <https://qiskit.org/documentation/finance/getting_started.html>`__
  library, into its circuit library module:
  ``qiskit_finance.circuit.library.probability_distributions``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rename-fake-mumbai-v2-2a4b4ead7360eab5.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The previous :class:`qiskit.test.mock.fake_mumbai_v2.FakeMumbaiV2` class
  has been renamed to ``FakeMumbaiFractionalCX`` to differentiate it from
  the :class:`~.BackendV2` based fake backend for the IBM Mumbai device,
  :class:`qiskit.test.mock.backends.FakeMumbaiV2`. If you were previously
  relying on the :class:`~qiskit.test.mock.fake_mumbai_v2.FakeMumbaiV2` class
  to get a fake backend that had fractional applications of :class:`~.CXGate`
  defined in its target you need to use ``FakeMumbaiFractionalCX`` class
  as the :class:`~qiskit.test.mock.backends.FakeMumbaiV2` will no longer
  have those extra gate definitions in its :class:`~.Target`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rework-circuit-argument-resolver-780091cd6f97f872.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The resolver used by :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.append` (and consequently all
  methods that add an instruction onto a :class:`.QuantumCircuit`) to convert
  bit specifiers has changed to make it faster and more reliable.  Certain
  constructs like::

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      qc.measure(np.array([0]), np.array([0]))

  will now work where they previously would incorrectly raise an error, but
  certain pathological inputs such as::

      from sympy import E, I, pi
      qc.x(E ** (I * pi))

  will now raise errors where they may have occasionally (erroneously)
  succeeded before.  For almost all correct uses, there should be no
  noticeable change except for a general speed-up.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rework-circuit-argument-resolver-780091cd6f97f872.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The semi-public internal method :meth:`.QuantumCircuit._append` no longer
  checks the types of its inputs, and assumes that there are no invalid
  duplicates in its argument lists.  This function is used by certain internal
  parts of Qiskit and other libraries to build up :class:`.QuantumCircuit`
  instances as quickly as possible by skipping the error checking when the
  data is already *known* to be correct.  In general, users or functions
  taking in user data should use the public :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.append`
  method, which resolves integer bit specifiers, broadcasts its arguments and
  checks the inputs for correctness.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/rust-pauli-expval-f2aa06c5bab85768.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Cython is no longer a build dependency of Qiskit Terra and is no longer
  required to be installed when building Qiskit Terra from source.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/vf2layout-preset-passmanager-db46513a24e79aa9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The preset passmanagers in :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers`
  for all optimization levels 2 and 3 as generated by
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_2_pass_manager` and
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_3_pass_manager` have
  been changed to run the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` by
  default prior to the layout pass. The
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` pass will quickly check if
  a perfect layout can be found and supersedes what was previously
  done for optimization levels 2 and 3 which were using a combination of
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TrivialLayout` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` to try and find a perfect
  layout. This will result in potentially different behavior when
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` is called by default as it removes a
  default path for all optimization levels >=2 of using a trivial layout
  (where ``circuit.qubits[0]`` is mapped to physical qubit 0,
  ``circuit.qubits[1]`` is mapped to physical qubit 1, etc) assuming the
  trivial layout is perfect. If your use case was dependent on the
  trivial layout you can explictly request it when transpiling by specifying
  ``layout_method="trivial"`` when calling :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/vf2layout-preset-passmanager-db46513a24e79aa9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The preset pass manager for optimization level 1 (when calling
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` with ``optimization_level=1`` or when
  no ``optimization_level`` argument is set) as generated by
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_1_pass_manager` has
  been changed so that :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` is
  called by default to quickly check if a a perfect layout can be found
  prior to the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DenseLayout`. However,
  unlike with optimization level 2 and 3 a trivial layout is still attempted
  prior to running :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` and if
  it's a perfect mapping the output from
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` will be used.


.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/deprecate-max-credits-56a404050a655a04.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The ``max_credits`` argument to :func:`~.execute_function.execute`, and all
  of the ``Qobj`` configurations (e.g. :class:`.QasmQobjConfig` and
  :class:`.PulseQobjConfig`), is deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release.  The credit system has not been in use on IBM Quantum backends for
  two years, and the option has no effect.  No alternative is necessary.
  For example, if you were calling :func:`~.execute_function.execute` as::

      job = execute(qc, backend, shots=4321, max_credits=10)

  you can simply omit the ``max_credits`` argument::

      job = execute(qc, backend, shots=4321)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/deprecate_odd_suzuki-091178b1bdc8b172.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Using an odd integer for the ``order`` argument on the constructor of the
  :class:`~.qiskit.synthesis.SuzukiTrotter` class is deprecated and will
  no longer work in a future release. The product formulae used by the
  :class:`~.qiskit.synthesis.SuzukiTrotter` are only defined when the order
  is even as the Suzuki product formulae is symmetric.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-registerless-bits-reverse-display-ee5efba0eff645a8.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The ``qregs``, ``cregs``, ``layout``, and ``global_phase`` kwargs to
  the :class:`.MatplotlibDrawer`, :class:`.TextDrawing`, and
  :class:`.QCircuitImage` classes, and the ``calibrations`` kwarg to the
  :class:`.MatplotlibDrawer` class, are now deprecated and will be removed
  in a subsequent release.


.. _Release Notes_0.20.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-circuit-conversion-loose-qubits-8d190426e4e892f1.yaml @ b'29c62c4bf5d01015283566c81b40a5d66c2b6e86'

- Fixed an error in the circuit conversion functions
  :func:`.circuit_to_gate` and :func:`.circuit_to_instruction` (and their
  associated circuit methods :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_gate` and
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_instruction`) when acting on a circuit with
  registerless bits, or bits in more than one register.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-control-flow-builder-parameter-copy-b1f6efcc6bc283e7.yaml @ b'd38620a6f399e9108b8ab183c5c31b70c8afcacf'

- Fixed an issue where calling :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.copy` on the "body"
  circuits of a control-flow operation created with the builder interface
  would raise an error.  For example, this was previously an error, but will
  now return successfully::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

      qreg = QuantumRegister(4)
      creg = ClassicalRegister(1)
      circ = QuantumCircuit(qreg, creg)

      with circ.if_test((creg, 0)):
          circ.h(0)

      if_else_instruction, _, _ = circ.data[0]
      true_body = if_else_instruction.params[0]
      true_body.copy()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-cx-equivalence-to-cp-and-crz-448c76d5b33516c8.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Added a missing entry from the standard session equivalence library
  between :class:`.CXGate` and :class:`.CPhaseGate` as well as between
  :class:`~.CXGate` and :class:`~.CRZGate`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-sparsepauliop-equiv-7a8a1420117dba21.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue where running the ``==`` operator between two
  :class:`~.SparsePauliOp` objects would raise an error when the two operators
  had different numbers of coefficients. For example::

      op = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("X", 1), ("Y", 1)])
      op2 = SparsePauliOp.from_list([("X", 1), ("Y", 1), ("Z", 0)])
      print(op == op2)

  This would previously raise a ``ValueError`` instead of returning ``False``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/add-v2-backend-support-in-transpiler-parse-inst-map-a617801850178d05.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed support in :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` for passing a
  :class:`~.InstructionScheduleMap` object to the underlying
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` based on the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` for
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.backend.BackendV2` based backends. Previously,
  the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function would not do this
  processing and any transpiler passes which do not support working with
  a :class:`~.Target` object yet would not have access to the default
  pulse calibrations for the instructions from a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.backend.BackendV2` backend.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-algorithms-7f1b969e5b2447f9.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~.AmplitudeAmplifier` is now correctly available from the root
  :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` module directly. Previously it was not included
  in the re-exported classes off the root module and was only accessible
  from ``qiskit.algorithms.amplitude_amplifiers``.
  Fixed `#7751 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7752>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-conditions-fold-mpl-1890dae334f7fbc4.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue with the ``mpl`` backend for the circuit drawer function
  :func:`~.circuit_drawer` and the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method
  where gates with conditions would not display properly when a sufficient
  number of gates caused the drawer to fold over to a second row.
  Fixed: `#7752 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7752>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-hhl_construct_circuit-nl-size-03cbfba9ed50a57a.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue where the :meth:`.HHL.construct_circuit` method under
  certain conditions would not return a correct
  :class:`~.QuantumCircuit`. Previously, the function had a rounding error in
  calculating how many qubits were necessary to represent the eigenvalues
  which would cause an incorrect circuit output.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-mitigator-endian-ead88499eb7e12ea.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an endianness bug in :meth:`.BaseReadoutMitigator.expectation_value`
  when a string ``diagonal`` was passed.  It will now correctly be interpreted
  as little endian in the same manner as the rest of Qiskit Terra, instead of
  big endian.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-partial_trace-no-systems-0dc2df3007942eb6.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`.quantum_info.partial_trace` when the
  function was asked to trace out *no* subsystems, it will now correctly
  return the :class:`.DensityMatrix` of the input state with all dimensions
  remaining rather than throwing an error.
  Fixed `#7613 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7612>`__

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-phase-gate-condition-text-display-3e1595ad508d225c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue with the ``text`` backend for the circuit drawer function
  :func:`~.circuit_drawer` and the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method
  when gates that use side text, such as the :class:`~.CPhaseGate` and
  :class:`~.RZZGate` gate classes, with classical conditions set would not
  display properly.
  Fixed `#7532 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7532>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix-registerless-bits-reverse-display-ee5efba0eff645a8.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. When using the ``reverse_bits``
  option with the ``mpl``, ``latex``, or ``text`` options, bits without
  registers did not display in the correct order.
  Fixed `#7303 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7303>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix_local_readout_mitigator_assignment_matrix-8bd4229a5159a7fe.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`.LocalReadoutMitigator.assignment_matrix`
  method where it would previously reject an input value for the
  ``qubits`` argument that wasn't a trivial sequence of qubits in the form:
  ``[0, 1, 2, ..., n-1]``. This has been corrected so that now any list of
  qubit indices to be measured are accepted by the method.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/fix_stabilizerstate_expval-2556c5ee916f5327.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`.StabilizerState.expectation_value`
  method's expectation value calculation, where the output expectation value
  would be incorrect if the input :class:`~.Pauli` operator for the ``oper``
  argument had a non-trivial phase.
  Fixed `#7441 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7441>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/opflow-igate-97df9a8b809116f1.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- An opflow expression containing the Pauli identity ``opflow.I`` no longer
  produces an :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.IGate` when converted to a circuit.
  This change fixes a difference in expectation; the identity gate in the circuit indicates
  a delay however in opflow we expect a mathematical identity -- meaning no operation at all.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/opflow-igate-97df9a8b809116f1.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliGate` no longer inserts an
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.IGate` for Paulis with the label ``"I"``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/paulisumop-may-equal-pauliop-af86de94020fba22.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- :class:`.PauliSumOp` equality tests now handle the case when
  one of the compared items is a single :class:`.PauliOp`.
  For example, ``0 * X + I == I`` now evaluates to True, whereas it was
  False prior to this release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/prepare-0.20-79918ed0fc5b496e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~.ALAPSchedule` and :class:`~.ASAPSchedule`
  transpiler passes when working with instructions that had custom pulse
  calibrations (i.e. pulse gates) set. Previously, the scheduling passes
  would not use the duration from the custom pulse calibration for thse
  instructions which would result in the an incorrect scheduling being
  generated for the circuit. This has been fixed so that now the scheduling
  passes will use the duration of the custom pulse calibration for any
  instruction in the circuit which has a custom calibration.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/prepare-0.20-79918ed0fc5b496e.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Fixed support for using :class:`~.ParameterExpression` instruction
  paramaters in the :class:`~.RZXCalibrationBuilder` transpiler pass.
  Previously, if an instruction parameter included a
  bound :class:`~.ParameterExpression` the pass would not be able to
  handle this correctly.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/qasm-lexer-bugfix-1779525b3738902c.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- Stopped the parser in :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` and
  :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file` from accepting OpenQASM programs
  that identified themselves as being from a language version other than 2.0.
  This parser is only for OpenQASM 2.0; support for imported circuits from
  OpenQASM 3.0 will be added in an upcoming release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.20/qasm3-escape-reserved-keywords-60d463db36d96319.yaml @ b'a2d13f55aad6c670f71a4613516b8891e02ece63'

- The OpenQASM 3 exporter, :class:`.qasm3.Exporter`, will now escape register and
  parameter names that clash with reserved OpenQASM 3 keywords by generating
  a new unique name.  Registers and parameters with the same name will no
  longer have naming clashes in the code output from the OpenQASM 3 exporter.
  Fixed `#7742 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7742>`__.

Aer 0.10.3
==========

No change

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.18.3
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.34.2
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.19.2:

Terra 0.19.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/prepare-0.19.2-bfcec925e228a2ad.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

Qiskit Terra 0.19.2 is predominantly a bugfix release, but also now comes
with wheels built for Python 3.10 on all major platforms.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/py310-support-869d47583c976eef.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Added support for running with Python 3.10. This includes publishing
  precompiled binaries to PyPI for Python 3.10 on supported platforms.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/py310-support-869d47583c976eef.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Starting from Python 3.10, Qiskit Terra will have reduced support for 32-bit platforms.
  These are Linux i686 and 32-bit Windows. These platforms with Python 3.10
  are now at Tier 3 instead of Tier 2 support (per the tiers defined in:
  https://qiskit.org/documentation/getting_started.html#platform-support)
  This is because the upstream dependencies Numpy and Scipy have dropped
  support for them. Qiskit will still publish precompiled binaries for these
  platforms, but we're unable to test the packages prior to publishing, and
  you will need a C/C++ compiler so that ``pip`` can build their dependencies
  from source. If you're using one of these platforms, we recommended that
  you use Python 3.7, 3.8, or 3.9.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/cvar-paulisumop-fe48698236b77f9b.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed a bug where the :class:`.CVaRMeasurement` attempted to convert a
  :class:`.PauliSumOp` to a dense matrix to check whether it were diagonal.
  For large operators (> 16 qubits) this computation was extremely expensive and raised
  an error if not explicitly enabled using ``qiskit.utils.algorithm_globals.massive = True``.
  The check is now efficient even for large numbers of qubits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/dag-drawer-should-check-filename-existence-4a83418a893717f6.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- :meth:`.DAGCircuit.draw` and the associated function :func:`.dag_drawer`
  will now show a more useful error message when the provided filename is not
  valid.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-adding-ancilla-register-without-checking-abe367dab5a63dbb.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.add_register` will no longer cause duplicate
  :class:`.AncillaQubit` references in a circuit when given an
  :class:`.AncillaRegister` whose bits are already present.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-circuit_to_instruction_single-bit-condition-db75291ce921001a.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed conversion of :class:`.QuantumCircuit`\ s with classical conditions on
  single, registerless :class:`.Clbit` \s to :class:`~.circuit.Instruction`\ s when
  using the :func:`.circuit_to_instruction` function or the
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_instruction` method.  For example, the following
  will now work::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Qubit, Clbit

      qc = QuantumCircuit([Qubit(), Clbit()])
      qc.h(0).c_if(qc.clbits[0], 0)
      qc.to_instruction()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-duplicated-bits-9e72181c9247f934.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Registers will now correctly reject duplicate bits.  Fixed `#7446
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7446>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-fake-openpulse2q-15f9c880de52e98f.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- The ``FakeOpenPulse2Q`` mock backend now has T2 times and readout errors
  stored for its qubits.  These are arbitrary values, approximately consistent
  with real backends at the time of its creation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-lietrotter-2q-61d5cd66e0bf7359.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fix the qubit order of 2-qubit evolutions in the
  :class:`.PauliEvolutionGate`, if used with a product formula synthesis.
  For instance, before, the evolution of ``IIZ + IZI + IZZ``

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.circuit.library import PauliEvolutionGate
      from qiskit.opflow import I, Z
      operator = (I ^ I ^ Z) + (I ^ Z ^ I) + (I ^ Z ^ Z)
      print(PauliEvolutionGate(operator).definition.decompose())

  produced

  .. code-block::

           
      q_0:  Rz(2) 
           
      q_1:  Rz(2) 
            ZZ(2)
      q_2: 


  whereas now it correctly yields

  .. code-block::

           
      q_0:  Rz(2) 
            ZZ(2)
      q_1:  Rz(2) 
           
      q_2: 

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-multi-underscore-display-37b900195ca3d2c5.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed a problem in the ``latex`` and ``mpl`` circuit drawers when register names
  with multiple underscores in the name did not display correctly.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-negative-fraction-display-735efdba3b825cba.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Negative numbers in array outputs from the drawers will now appear as
  decimal numbers instead of fractions with huge numerators and
  denominators.  Like positive numbers, they will still be fractions if the
  ratio is between small numbers.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-non-global-operation-name-ideal-sim-3dcbc97e29c707c7.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed an issue with the :meth:`.Target.get_non_global_operation_names`
  method when running on a target incorrectly raising an exception on targets
  with ideal global operations. Previously, if this method was called on a
  target that contained any ideal globally defined operations, where the
  instruction properties are set to ``None``, this method would raise an
  exception instead of treating that instruction as global.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-non-global-operation-name-ideal-sim-3dcbc97e29c707c7.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function where
  it could fail when being passed a :class:`.Target` object directly with the
  ``target`` kwarg.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-non-global-operation-name-ideal-sim-3dcbc97e29c707c7.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function where
  it could fail when the ``backend`` argument was a :class:`.BackendV2`
  or a :class:`.Target` via the ``target`` kwarg that contained ideal
  globally defined operations.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-path2d-mpl3.4-b1af3a23b408d30a.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed an issue where plotting Bloch spheres could cause an ``AttributeError``
  to be raised in Jupyter or when trying to crop figures down to size with
  Matplotlib 3.3 or 3.4 (but not 3.5).  For example, the following code would
  previously crash with a message::

    AttributeError: 'Arrow3D' object has no attribute '_path2d'

  but will now succeed with all current supported versions of Matplotlib::

    from qiskit.visualization import plot_bloch_vector
    plot_bloch_vector([0, 1, 0]).savefig("tmp.png", bbox_inches='tight')

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-pauli-sum-op-permute-a9b742f3a2fad934.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed a bug in :meth:`.PauliSumOp.permute` where the object on which the
  method is called was permuted in-place, instead of returning a permuted
  copy.  This bug only occured for permutations that left the number of qubits
  in the operator unchanged.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-paulievo-inverse-b53a6ecd0ff9a313.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed the :meth:`.PauliEvolutionGate.inverse` method, which previously
  computed the inverse by inverting the evolution time.  This was only the
  correct inverse if the operator was evolved exactly. In particular, this
  led to the inverse of Trotterization-based time evolutions being incorrect.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-qi-transpiled-8df449529bf6d9a2.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- The :meth:`.QuantumInstance.execute` method will no longer mutate its input
  if it is given a list of circuits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-qpy-empty-definition-a3a24a0409377a76.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed QPY serialisation of custom instructions which had an explicit no-op
  definition.  Previously these would be written and subsequently read the
  same way as if they were opaque gates (with no given definition).  They will
  now correctly round-trip an empty definition.  For example, the following
  will now be correct::

      import io
      from qiskit.circuit import Instruction, QuantumCircuit, qpy_serialization

      # This instruction is explicitly defined as a one-qubit gate with no
      # operations.
      empty = QuantumCircuit(1, name="empty").to_instruction()
      # This instruction will perform some operations that are only known
      # by the hardware backend.
      opaque = Instruction("opaque", 1, 0, [])

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.append(empty, [0], [])
      circuit.append(opaque, [1], [])

      qpy_file = io.BytesIO()
      qpy_serialization.dump(circuit, qpy_file)
      qpy_file.seek(0)
      new_circuit = qpy_serialization.load(qpy_file)[0]

      # Previously both instructions in `new_circuit` would now be opaque, but
      # there is now a correct distinction.
      circuit == new_circuit

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-quantum-instance-backend-v2-a4e2678fe3ce39d1.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Added a missing :attr:`.BackendV2.provider` attribute to implementations
  of the :class:`.BackendV2` abstract class. Previously, :class:`.BackendV2`
  backends could be initialized with a provider but that was not accessible
  to users.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-quantum-instance-backend-v2-a4e2678fe3ce39d1.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed support for the :class:`.QuantumInstance` class when running with
  a :class:`.BackendV2` backend. Previously, attempting to use a
  :class:`.QuantumInstance` with a :class:`.BackendV2` would have resulted in
  an error.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-vqe-paramorder-if-ansatz-resized-14634a7efff7c74f.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed a bug in :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` where the parameters of the ansatz were
  still explicitly ASCII-sorted by their name if the ansatz was resized. This led to a
  mismatched order of the optimized values in the ``optimal_point`` attribute of the result
  object.

  In particular, this bug occurred if no ansatz was set by the user and the VQE chose
  a default with 11 or more free parameters.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qasm-lexer-bugfix-1779525b3738902c.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Stopped the parser in :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` and
  :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file` from accepting OpenQASM programs
  that identified themselves as being from a language version other than 2.0.
  This parser is only for OpenQASM 2.0; support for imported circuits from
  OpenQASM 3.0 will be added in an upcoming release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qpy-controlflow-97608dbfee5f3e7e.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed QPY serialization of :class:`.QuantumCircuit` objects that contained
  control flow instructions. Previously if you attempted to serialize a
  circuit containing :class:`.IfElseOp`, :class:`.WhileLoopOp`, or
  :class:`.ForLoopOp` the serialization would fail.
  Fixed `#7583 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7583>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qpy-controlflow-97608dbfee5f3e7e.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- Fixed QPY serialization of :class:`.QuantumCircuit` containing subsets of
  bits from a :class:`.QuantumRegister` or :class:`.ClassicalRegister`.
  Previously if you tried to serialize a circuit like this it would
  incorrectly treat these bits as standalone :class:`.Qubit` or
  :class:`.Clbit` without having a register set. For example, if you try to
  serialize a circuit like::

      import io
      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister
      from qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization import load, dump

      qr = QuantumRegister(2)
      qc = QuantumCircuit([qr[0]])
      qc.x(0)
      with open('file.qpy', 'wb') as fd:
          dump(qc, fd)

  when that circuit is loaded now the registers will be correctly populated
  fully even though the circuit only contains a subset of the bits from the
  register.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/warn-on-too-large-qft-a2dd60d4a374751a.yaml @ b'6069e5cc01632353972068218c1acfa60f01a119'

- :class:`.QFT` will now warn if it is instantiated or built with settings
  that will cause it to lose precision, rather than raising an
  ``OverflowError``.  This can happen if the number of qubits is very large
  (slightly over 1000) without the approximation degree being similarly large.
  The circuit will now build successfully, but some angles might be
  indistinguishable from zero, due to limitations in double-precision
  floating-point numbers.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.3:

Aer 0.10.3
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.3_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/release-0.10.3-22c93ddf4d160c5f.yaml @ b'326efca12cfcd7341f49ec4e5cf5a5aa769f6c94'

Qiskit Aer 0.10.3 is mainly a bugfix release, fixing several bugs that
have been discovered since the 0.10.2 release. Howver, this release also
introduces support for running with Python 3.10 including precompiled
binary wheels on all major platforms. This release also includes precompiled
binary wheels for arm64 on macOS.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.3_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/add-py310-b6b1e7a0ed3a8e9d.yaml @ b'e9233eab38ca16d17fce56a0d4dbf7af09b829a8'

- Added support for running with Python 3.10. This includes publishing
  precompiled binaries to PyPI for Python 3.10 on supported platforms.

.. releasenotes/notes/arm64-macos-wheels-3778e83a8d036168.yaml @ b'c5f63f387fd0837d62195c550334b95b618b1a88'

- Added support for M1 macOS systems. Precompiled binaries for supported
  Python versions >=3.8 on arm64 macOS will now be published on PyPI for this
  and future releases.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.3_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/add-py310-b6b1e7a0ed3a8e9d.yaml @ b'e9233eab38ca16d17fce56a0d4dbf7af09b829a8'

- Qiskit Aer no longer fully supports 32 bit platforms on Python >= 3.10.
  These are Linux i686 and 32-bit Windows. These platforms with Python 3.10
  are now at Tier 3 instead of Tier 2 support (per the tiers defined in:
  https://qiskit.org/documentation/getting_started.html#platform-support)
  This is because the upstream dependencies Numpy and Scipy have dropped
  support for them. Qiskit will still publish precompiled binaries for these
  platforms, but we're unable to test the packages prior to publishing, and
  you will need a C/C++ compiler so that ``pip`` can build their dependencies
  from source. If you're using one of these platforms, we recommended that
  you use Python 3.7, 3.8, or 3.9.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/delay-pass-units-a31341568057fdb3.yaml @ b'0119f3b1f55e2da1444fc89109b93f85833efbf3'

- Fixes a bug in :class:`.RelaxationNoisePass` where instruction durations
  were always assumed to be in *dt* time units, regardless of the actual
  unit of the isntruction. Now unit conversion is correctly handled for
  all instruction duration units.

  See `#1453 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1453>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-local-noise-pass-f94546869a169103.yaml @ b'71e7e53fe9c690d3f9ce194d785610ea8a3c9d8f'

- Fixes an issue with :class:`.LocalNoisePass` for noise functions that
  return a :class:`.QuantumCircuit` for the noise op. These were appended
  to the DAG as an opaque circuit instruction that must be unrolled to be
  simulated. This fix composes them so that the cirucit instructions are
  added to the new DAG and can be simulated without additional unrolling
  if all circuit instructions are supported by the simulator.

  See `#1447 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1447>`__
  for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_parallel_diag_fusion-a7f914b3a9f491f7.yaml @ b'bc306537a47cd0116744900538bd543a3520bddd'

- Multi-threaded transpilations to generate diagonal gates will now work correctly if
  the number of gates of a circuit exceeds ``fusion_parallelization_threshold``.
  Previously, different threads would occasionally fuse the same element into multiple blocks,
  causing incorrect results.

.. releasenotes/notes/resolve_parameters_before_truncation-ec7074f1f0f831e2.yaml @ b'b086dc6505ad1c116f25c58cc4e29b6ec652bc8b'

- Fixes a bug with truncation of circuits in parameterized Qobjs.
  Previously parameters of parameterized QObj could be wrongly resolved
  if unused qubits of their circuits were truncated, because indices of
  the parameters were not updated after the instructions on unmeasured qubits
  were removed.

  See `#1427 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1427>`__
  for details.

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.18.3
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.34.1
*************

Terra 0.19.1
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.10.2_Aer:

Aer 0.10.2
===========

.. _Release Notes_0.10.2_Aer_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-for-loop-no-parameter-aa5b04b1da0e956b.yaml @ b'c4a97d4e02baebd22497e3a3f6e83bdcf35fbb6a'

- Fixed simulation of ``for`` loops where the loop parameter was not used in
  the body of the loop.  For example, previously this code would fail, but
  will now succeed:

  .. code-block:: python

      import qiskit
      from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator

      qc = qiskit.QuantumCircuit(2)
      with qc.for_loop(range(4)) as i:
          qc.h(0)
          qc.cx(0, 1)

      AerSimulator(method="statevector").run(qc)

.. releasenotes/notes/fix_qerror_to_dict-13a7683ac4adddd4.yaml @ b'cb17b3fd547eb54b7b48f1c3e959ec2c3dabab6a'

- Fixes a bug in :meth:`.QuantumError.to_dict` where N-qubit circuit
  instructions where the assembled instruction always applied to
  qubits ``[0, ..., N-1]`` rather than the instruction qubits. This
  bug also affected device and fake backend noise models.

  See `Issue 1415 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1415>`__
  for details.

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.18.3
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.34.0
*************

Qiskit 0.34.0 includes a point release of Qiskit Aer: version 0.10.1, which
patches performance regressions in version 0.10.0 that were discovered
immediately post-release. See below for the release notes for both Qiskit Aer
0.10.0 and 0.10.1.

Terra 0.19.1
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.1:

Aer 0.10.1
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-1-release-6338690271374e16.yaml @ b'0ca6d1a3681110122c2f0c069806422248afef17'

The Qiskit Aer 0.10.1 patch fixes performance regressions introduced in Qiskit Aer 0.10.0.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-1-release-6338690271374e16.yaml @ b'0ca6d1a3681110122c2f0c069806422248afef17'

- Fix performance regression in noisy simulations due to large increase in
  serialization overhead for loading noise models from Python into C++
  resulting from unintended nested Python multiprocessing calls.
  See `issue 1407 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1407>`__
  for details.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0:

Aer 0.10.0
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

The Qiskit Aer 0.10 release includes several performance and noise model
improvements. Some highlights are:

* Improved performance for parallel shot GPU and HPC simulations
* Support for simulation of circuits containing QASM 3.0 control-flow instructions
* Support for relaxation noise on scheduled circuits in backend noise models
* Support of user-created transpiler passes for defining custom gate errors and
  noise models, and inserting them into circuits.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added support of QASM 3.0 control-flow instructions introduced in Qiskit-Terra
  0.19.0. Supported instructions are :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ForLoopOp`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.WhileLoopOp`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ContinueLoopOp`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.BreakLoopOp`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.IfElseOp`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added a batched-shot simulation optimization for GPU simulations. This
  optional feature will use available memory on 1 or more GPUs to run multiple
  simulation shots in parallel for greatly improved performance on
  multi-shot simulations with noise models and/or intermediate measurements.

  This option is enabled by default when using ``device="GPU"`` and a
  simulation ``method`` of either ``"statevector"`` or ``"density_matrix"``
  with the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`.  It can be disabled by
  setting ``batched_shots_gpu=False`` in the simulator options.

  This optimization is most beneficial for small to medium numbers of qubits
  where there is sufficient GPU memory to run multiple simulations in
  parallel. The maximum number of active circuit qubits for enabling this
  optimization can be configured using the ``batch_shots_gpu_max_qubits``
  simulator option. The default value of this option is 16.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added the new ``max_shot_size`` option to a custom executor for
  running multiple shots of a noisy circuit in parallel.

  For example configuring ``max_shot_size`` with a custom executor::

     backend = AerSimulator(
        max_shot_size=1, max_job_size=1, executor=custom_executor)
     job = backend.run(circuits)

  will split the shots of a noisy circuit into multiple circuits.
  After all individual shots have finished executing, the job results
  are automatically combined into a single :class:`~qiskit.result.Result`
  object that is returned by ``job.result()``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added the ``mps_swap_direction`` simulator option that allows the user to determine
  the direction of internal swaps, when they are inserted for a
  2-qubit gate. Possible values are ``"mps_swap_right"`` and ``"mps_swap_left"``.
  The direction of the swaps may affect performance, depending on the circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Implemented a new measurement sampling optimization for the
  ``"matrix_product_state"`` simulation method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`. Currently this algorithm
  is used only when all qubits are measured and when the simulator
  ``mps_sample_measure_algorithm`` simulator option is set to ``"mps_probabilities"``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Improved the performance of the measure instruction for the ``"matrix_product_state"``
  simulation method of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added a :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveClifford` instruction for
  saving the state of the stabilizer simulation method as a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` object.

  Note that this instruction is essentially equivalent to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveStabilizer` instruction, however
  that instruction will return the saved state as a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerState` object instead of a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` object.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/add-noise-passes-1cb52b57a6d2294d.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added two transpiler passes for inserting instruction-dependent quantum
  errors into circuits:

  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.LocalNoisePass`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.RelaxationNoisePass`

  The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.LocalNoisePass` pass can
  be used to implement custom parameterized noise models by defining a
  noise generating function of the form

  .. code-block:: python

          def fn(
              inst: Instruction,
              qubits: Optional[List[int]] = None,
          ) -> InstructionLike

  which returns a noise instruction (eg. a :class:`.QuantumError` or other instruction)
  that can depend on any properties or parameters of the instruction and
  qubit arguements.

  This function can be applied to all instructions in a circuit, or a
  specified subset (See the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.LocalNoisePass` documentation
  for additional details.)

  The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.RelaxationNoisePass`
  is a special case of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.LocalNoisePass` using a
  predefined noise function that returns a tensor product of
  :func:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.thermal_relaxation_error` on each
  qubit in an instruction, dependent on the instruction's duration and
  the supplied relaxation time constant parameters of the pass.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/add-noise-passes-1cb52b57a6d2294d.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- The basic device noise model implemented by
  :meth:`.NoiseModel.from_backend` and
  :meth:`.AerSimulator.from_backend` has been
  upgraded to allow adding duration-dependent relaxation errors on
  circuit delay gates using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.RelaxationNoisePass`.

  To enable this noise when running noisy simulations you must first
  schedule your circuit to insert scheduled delay instructions as
  follows:

  .. code-block:: python

    backend = AerSimulator.from_backend(ibmq_backend)
    scheduled_circuit = qiskit.transpile(
        circuit, backend=backend, scheduling_method='asap')
    result = backend.run(scheduled_circuit).result()

  If the circuit is transpiled without being scheduled (and also
  contains no delay instructions) the noisy simulation will not include
  the effect of delay relaxation errors. In this case the simulation
  will be equivalent to the previous qiskit-aer 0.9 simulation where
  relaxation noise is only added to gate instructions based on their
  duration as obtained from the backend properties.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- The constructor of :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.QuantumError` now
  accepts several new types of input as ``noise_ops`` argument, for example:

  .. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit.library import IGate, XGate, Reset
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Kraus
    from qiskit.providers.aer.noise import QuantumError

    # Quantum channels
    kraus = Kraus([
        np.array([[1, 0], [0, np.sqrt(1 - 0.9)]], dtype=complex),
        np.array([[0, 0], [0, np.sqrt(0.9)]], dtype=complex)
    ])
    print(QuantumError(kraus))

    # Construction from a QuantumCircuit
    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    error = QuantumError(qc)

    # Construction from a tuple of (Instruction, List[int]), where the list of
    # integers represents the qubits.
    error = QuantumError((Reset(), [0]))

    # Construction from an iterable of objects in the same form as above, but
    # where each also has an associated probability.
    error = QuantumError([
        ((IGate(), [0]), 0.9),
        ((XGate(), [0]), 0.1),
    ])

    # A short-hand for the iterable form above, where the qubits are implicit,
    # and each instruction is over all qubits.
    error = QuantumError([(IGate(), 0.9), (XGate(), 0.1)])

  Note that the original JSON-based input format is deperecated.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added a utility function :func:`qiskit.providers.aer.utils.transform_noise_model`
  for constructing a noise model by applying a supplied function to all
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.QuantumError`\ s in the noise model.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added two utility functions
  :func:`qiskit.providers.aer.utils.transpile_quantum_error` and
  :func:`qiskit.providers.aer.utils.transpile_noise_model` for transpiling
  the circuits contained in :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.QuantumError`,
  and all errors in a :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Added the ability to add :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.QuantumError`
  objects directly to a :class:`.QuantumCircuit` without converting
  to a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Kraus` instruction.

  Circuits containing quantum errors can now be run on the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` simulators as an alternative
  to, or in addition to, building a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel` for defining noisy circuit
  instructions.

  Example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator
      from qiskit.providers.aer.noise import pauli_error

      error_h = pauli_error([('I', 0.95), ('X', 0.05)])
      error_cx = pauli_error([('II', 0.9), ('XX', 0.1)])

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.append(error_h, [0])
      qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.append(error_cx, [0, 1])
      qc.cx(0, 2)
      qc.append(error_cx, [0, 2])
      qc.measure_all()

      backend = AerSimulator(method='stabilizer')
      result = backend.run(qc).result()
      result.get_counts(0)

  Circuits containing quantum errors can also be evaluated using
  the :mod:`~qiskit.quantum_info` quantum channel and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- The return type of several save instructions have been changed to be the
  corresponding Qiskit Terra classes rather than raw NumPy arrays or
  dictionaries. The types that have changed are

  * :func:`.save_statevector` now returns as a
    :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`
  * :func:`.save_density_matrix` now returns as a
    :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix`
  * :func:`.save_stabilizer` now returns as
    :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerState`
  * :func:`.save_unitary` now returns as
    :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`
  * :func:`.save_superop` now returns as
    :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SuperOp`
  * :func:`.save_probabilities_dict` now returns as a
    :class:`~qiskit.result.ProbDistribution`

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Changed the default value of ``standard_gates`` to ``None`` for all functions
  in :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.errors.standard_errors` as
  those functions are updated so that they use standard gates by default.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- When an unsupported argument is supplied to :func:`.approximate_quantum_error`,
  it will now raise a :class:`.NoiseError` instead of a ``RuntimeError``.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/0-10-release-8c37dadcc1c82fcc.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Using NumPy ``ndarray`` methods and attributes on the return type of
  :func:`.save_statevector`, :func:`.save_density_matrix`,
  :func:`.save_unitary`, and :func:`.save_superop` has been deprecated, and
  will stop working in a future release.
  These instructions now return :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` classes for their
  return types. Partial backwards compatability with treating these objects as
  NumPy arrays is implemented by forwarding methods to the internal array
  during the deprecation period.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/add-noise-passes-1cb52b57a6d2294d.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Passing in a :class:`.BackendProperties` object for the ``backend`` argument of
  :meth:`.NoiseModel.from_backend` has been deprecated, as it is incompatible
  with duration dependent delay noises, and will be removed in a future release.
  Pass in a Qiskit Terra :class:`.BackendV1` object instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated the ``number_of_qubits`` option of the :class:`.QuantumError`
  constructor in favor of automatic determination of the dimension.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated the ``standard_gates`` option of the :class:`.QuantumError`
  constructor in favor of externalizing such basis-change functionality.
  In many cases, you can transform any error into an error defined
  only with specific gates using :func:`.approximate_quantum_error`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated the ``standard_gates`` option of all functions in
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.errors.standard_errors`
  in favor of returning errors in the form of a mixture of standard gates
  as much as possible by default.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated all functions in :mod:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.errors.errorutils`
  because they are helper functions meant to be used only for implementing
  functions in :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.errors.standard_errors` and
  they should have been provided as private functions.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated the ``standard_gates`` option of :meth:`.NoiseModel.from_backend`
  in favor of externalizing such basis-change functionality.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated :meth:`.NoiseModel.from_dict` to make the noise model
  independent of Qobj (JSON) format.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated all public variables, functions and classes in
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.utils.noise_transformation` except for
  :func:`.approximate_quantum_error` and :func:`.approximate_noise_model`,
  because they are helper functions meant to be used only for implementing the
  ``approximate_*`` functions and they should have been provided as private functions.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Deprecated :func:`.remap_noise_model` since the C++ code now automatically
  truncates and remaps noise models if it truncates circuits.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.10.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.10/refactor-noise-bab93a76677ba822.yaml @ b'61b028b7ccd1d6e96c8de48a10648c0bc3c07ff9'

- Changes in the implementation of the function :func:`.approximate_quantum_error`
  may change the resulting approximate error compared to Qiskit Aer 0.9.

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.18.3_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.18.3
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.18.3_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix delivered in `#1100 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1100>`__ for
  an issue with JSON encoding and decoding when using
  ``ParameterExpression``\ s in conjunction with Qiskit Terra 0.19.1 and
  above.  Previously, the ``Parameter`` instances reconstructed from the JSON
  output would have different unique identifiers, causing them to seem unequal
  to the input.  They will now have the correct backing identities.

*************
Qiskit 0.33.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_Terra:

Terra 0.19.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_Terra_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/prepare-0.19.1-37d14fd5cf05a576.yaml @ b'ee0d76052411230848ab2830c5741c14c2450439'

Qiskit Terra 0.19.1 is a bugfix release, solving some issues in 0.19.0
concerning circuits constructed by the control-flow builder interface,
conditional gates and QPY serialisation of newer Terra objects.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_Terra_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/reinstate-deprecate-loose-measure-reset-11591e35d350aaeb.yaml @ b'a9b6093551e0a6e6000fa2230c8182c7e0080dc5'

- The loose functions ``qiskit.circuit.measure.measure()`` and
  ``qiskit.circuit.reset.reset()`` are deprecated, and will be removed in a
  future release.  Instead, you should access these as methods on
  :class:`.QuantumCircuit`::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)

      # Replace this deprecated form ...
      from qiskit.circuit.measure import measure
      measure(circuit, 0, 0)

      # ... with either of the next two lines:
      circuit.measure(0, 0)
      QuantumCircuit.measure(circuit, 0, 0)


.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_Terra_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-circuit-conversion-loose-qubits-8d190426e4e892f1.yaml @ b'ee0d76052411230848ab2830c5741c14c2450439'

- Fixed an error in the circuit conversion functions
  :func:`.circuit_to_gate` and :func:`.circuit_to_instruction` (and their
  associated circuit methods :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_gate` and
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.to_instruction`) when acting on a circuit with
  registerless bits, or bits in more than one register.  Previously, the
  number of bits necessary for the created gate or instruction would be
  calculated incorrectly, often causing an exception during the conversion.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-control-flow-builder-parameter-copy-b1f6efcc6bc283e7.yaml @ b'7df86762371a5fb69c56470e414ed3679de2384b'

- Fixed an issue where calling :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.copy` on the "body"
  circuits of a control-flow operation created with the builder interface
  would raise an error.  For example, this was previously an error, but will
  now return successfully::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

      qreg = QuantumRegister(4)
      creg = ClassicalRegister(1)
      circ = QuantumCircuit(qreg, creg)

      with circ.if_test((creg, 0)):
          circ.h(0)

      if_else_instruction, _, _ = circ.data[0]
      true_body = if_else_instruction.params[0]
      true_body.copy()

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-circuit-builder-registers-21deba9a43356fb5.yaml @ b'188e9ecfdce2a1bb2262aeb9cbf5e8c94450064b'

- The control-flow builder interface now supports using :class:`.ClassicalRegister`\ s
  as conditions in nested control-flow scopes.  Previously, doing this would
  not raise an error immediately, but the internal circuit blocks would not
  have the correct registers defined, and so later logic that worked with the
  inner blocks would fail.

  For example, previously the drawers would fail when trying to draw an inner
  block conditioned on a classical register, whereas now it will succeed, such
  as in this example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

      qreg = QuantumRegister(4)
      creg = ClassicalRegister(1)
      circ = QuantumCircuit(qreg, creg)

      with circ.for_loop(range(10)) as a:
          circ.ry(a, 0)
          with circ.if_test((creg, 1)):
              circ.break_loop()

      print(circ.draw(cregbundle=False))
      print(circ.data[0][0].blocks[0].draw(cregbundle=False))

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-paramater-vector-qpy-52b16ccefecf8b2e.yaml @ b'76a54747df03c359744f1934dcc7f948715faf80'

- Fixed :mod:`~qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` support for
  serializing :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects that are
  using :class:`.ParameterVector` or :class:`.ParameterVectorElement` as
  parameters. Previously, a :class:`.ParameterVectorElement` parameter was
  just treated as a :class:`.Parameter` for QPY serialization which meant
  the :class:`.ParameterVector` context was lost in QPY and the output
  order of :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` could be
  incorrect.

  To fix this issue a new QPY format version, :ref:`version_3`, was required.
  This new format version includes a representation of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterVectorElement` class which is
  described in the :mod:`~qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` documentation at
  :ref:`param_vector`.

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-pauli-evolution-gate-bf85592f0f8f0ba7.yaml @ b'73024df2f62b0f8c9fd2e439a7bbeba2d8b0aaa9'

- Fixed the :mod:`~qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` support for serializing
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` object. Previously,
  the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` was treated as
  a custom gate for serialization and would be deserialized as a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` object that had the same definition and
  name as the original :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate`.
  However, this would lose the original state from the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate`. This has been fixed
  so that starting in this release a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` in the circuit will
  be preserved 1:1 across QPY serialization now. The only limitation with
  this is that it does not support custom
  :class:`~qiskit.synthesis.EvolutionSynthesis` classes. Only the classes
  available from :mod:`qiskit.synthesis` can be used with a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` for qpy serialization.

  To fix this issue a new QPY format version, :ref:`version_3`, was required.
  This new format version includes a representation of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` class which is
  described in the :mod:`~qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` documentation at
  :ref:`pauli_evo_qpy`.

.. releasenotes/notes/reinstate-deprecate-loose-measure-reset-11591e35d350aaeb.yaml @ b'a9b6093551e0a6e6000fa2230c8182c7e0080dc5'

- Two loose functions ``qiskit.circuit.measure.measure()`` and
  ``qiskit.circuit.reset.reset()`` were accidentally removed without a
  deprecation period.  They have been reinstated, but are marked as deprecated
  in favour of the methods :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.measure` and
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.reset`, respectively, and will be removed in a future
  release.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.1_Terra_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

.. releasenotes/notes/fix-circuit-builder-registers-21deba9a43356fb5.yaml @ b'188e9ecfdce2a1bb2262aeb9cbf5e8c94450064b'

- The new control-flow builder interface uses various context managers and
  helper objects to do its work.  These should not be considered part of the
  public API, and are liable to be changed and removed without warning.  The
  *usage* of the builder interface has stability guarantees, in the sense that
  the behaviour described by :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.for_loop`,
  :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.while_loop` and :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.if_test` for
  the builder interface are subject to the standard deprecation policies, but
  the actual objects used to effect this are not.  You should not rely on the
  objects (such as ``IfContext`` or ``ControlFlowBuilderBlock``) existing in
  their current locations, or having any methods or attributes attached to
  them.

  This was not previously clear in the 0.19.0 release.  All such objects now
  have a warning in their documentation strings making this explicit.  It is
  likely in the future that their locations and backing implementations will
  become quite different.

Aer 0.9.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.18.2_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.18.2
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.18.2_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix delivered in `#1065 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1065>`__ for the
  issue where job kept crashing when ``Parameter`` was passed in circuit metadata.

- Fix delivered in `#1094 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/pull/1094>`__ for
  the issue wherein :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeEncoder`
  does an extra `decompose()` if the circuit being serialized is a ``BlueprintCircuit``.

*************
Qiskit 0.33.0
*************

This release officially marks the end of support for the Qiskit Aqua project
in Qiskit. It was originally deprecated in the 0.25.0 release and as was documented
in that release the ``qiskit-aqua`` package has been removed from the Qiskit
metapackage, which means ``pip install qiskit`` will no
longer include ``qiskit-aqua``. However, because of limitations in python
packaging we cannot automatically remove a pre-existing install of ``qiskit-aqua``
when upgrading a previous version of Qiskit to this release (or a future release)
with ``pip install -U qiskit``. If you are upgrading from a previous version it's
recommended that you manually uninstall Qiskit Aqua with
``pip uninstall qiskit-aqua`` or install in a fresh python environment.

The application modules that were provided by ``qiskit-aqua`` have been split into
several new packages:
``qiskit-optimization``, ``qiskit-nature``, ``qiskit-machine-learning``, and
``qiskit-finance``. These packages can be installed by themselves (via the
standard pip install command, e.g. ``pip install qiskit-nature``) or with the
rest of the Qiskit metapackage as optional extras (e.g.
``pip install 'qiskit[finance,optimization]'`` or ``pip install 'qiskit[all]'``).
The core algorithms and the operator flow now exist as part of Qiskit Terra at
``qiskit.algorithms`` and ``qiskit.opflow``. Depending on your existing
usage of Aqua you should either use the application packages or the new modules
in Qiskit Terra. For more details on how to migrate from Qiskit Aqua you can
refer to the
`Aqua Migration Guide <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/blob/main/docs/tutorials/Qiskit%20Algorithms%20Migration%20Guide.ipynb>`__.

This release also officially deprecates the Qiskit Ignis project. Accordingly, in a
future release the ``qiskit-ignis`` package will be removed from the Qiskit
metapackage, which means in that future release ``pip install qiskit`` will no
longer include ``qiskit-ignis``. Qiskit Ignis has been supersceded by the
`Qiskit Experiments <https://qiskit.org/documentation/experiments/>`__ project and active
development has ceased. While deprecated, critical bug fixes and compatibility fixes will
continue to be made to provide users a sufficient opportunity to migrate off of Ignis. After the
deprecation period (which will be no shorter than 3 months from this release) the project will be
retired and archived. You can refer to the
`migration guide <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis#migration-guide>`__ for details on how to
switch from Qiskit Ignis to Qiskit Experiments.

.. _Release Notes_0.19.0:

Terra 0.19.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/0.19-prelude-65c295aa9497ed48.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

The Qiskit Terra 0.19 release highlights are:

* A new version of the abstract Qiskit/hardware interface, in the form of
  :class:`.BackendV2`, which comes with a new data structure
  :class:`~.transpiler.Target` to allow backends to better model their
  constraints for the :ref:`transpiler <qiskit-transpiler>`.

* An :ref:`extensible plugin interface <qiskit-transpiler-plugins>` to the
  :class:`~.passes.UnitarySynthesis` transpiler pass, allowing users or
  other packages to extend Qiskit Terra's
  synthesis routines with new methods.

* Control-flow instructions, for representing ``for`` and ``while`` loops
  and ``if``/``else`` statements in :class:`.QuantumCircuit`.  The
  simulators in Qiskit Aer will soon be able to work with these new
  instructions, allowing you to write more dynamic quantum programs.

* Preliminary support for the evolving `OpenQASM 3 specification`_.  You can
  use the new :mod:`qiskit.qasm3` module to serialize your
  :class:`.QuantumCircuit`\ s into OpenQASM 3, including the new control-flow
  constructs.

.. _OpenQASM 3 specification: https://qiskit.github.io/openqasm/

This release marks the end of support for Python 3.6 in Qiskit.  This
release of Qiskit Terra, and any subsequent bugfix releases in the 0.19.x
series, will be the last to work with Python 3.6.  Starting from the next
minor release (0.20.0) of Qiskit Terra, the minimum required Python version
will be 3.7.

As always, there are many more features and fixes in this release as well,
which you can read about below.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/QuantumCircuit.decompose-takes-which-gate-to-decompose-d857da5d0c41fb66.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.decompose` and its corresponding transpiler pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Decompose` now optionally accept a
  parameter containing a collection of gate names.  If this parameter is given,
  then only gates with matching names will be decomposed.  This supports
  Unix-shell-style wildcard matches.  For example::

      qc.decompose(["h", "r[xz]"])

  will decompose any ``h``, ``rx`` or ``rz`` gates, but leave (for example) ``x`` gates untouched.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/SPSA-termination-callback-a1ec14892f553982.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the ``termination_checker`` argument to the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` optimizer.
  This allows the user to implement a custom termination criterion.

  .. code-block:: python

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SPSA

      def objective(x):
          return np.linalg.norm(x) + .04*np.random.rand(1)

      class TerminationChecker:

          def __init__(self, N : int):
              """
              Callback to terminate optimization when the average decrease over
              the last N data points is smaller than the specified tolerance.
              """
              self.N = N
              self.values = []

          def __call__(self, nfev, parameters, value, stepsize, accepted) -> bool:
              """
              Returns:
                  True if the optimization loop should be terminated.
              """
              self.values.append(value)

              if len(self.values) > self.N:
                  last_values = self.values[-self.N:]
                  pp = np.polyfit(range(self.N), last_values, 1)
                  slope = pp[0] / self.N

                  if slope > 0:
                      return True
              return False

      maxiter = 400
      spsa = SPSA(maxiter=maxiter, termination_checker=TerminationChecker(10))
      parameters, value, niter = spsa.optimize(2, objective, initial_point=np.array([0.5, 0.5]))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-backend-v2-ce84c976fb13b038.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new version of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.Backend` interface,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2`. This new version is a large change
  from the previous version, :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` and
  changes both the user access pattern for properties of the backend (like
  number of qubits, etc) and how the backend represents its constraints
  to the transpiler. The execution of circuits (via the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2.run` method) remains unchanged. With
  a :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` backend instead of having a separate
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.configuration`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.properties`, and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.defaults` methods that construct
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` objects respectively,
  like in the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` interface, the attributes
  contained in those output objects are accessible directly as attributes of
  the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` object. For example, to get the
  number of qubits for a backend with :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1`
  you would do::

      num_qubits = backend.configuration().n_qubits

  while with :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` it is::

      num_qubits = backend.num_qubits

  The other change around this is that the number of attributes exposed in
  the abstract :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` class is designed to be
  a hardware/vendor agnostic set of the required or optional fields that the
  rest of Qiskit can use today with any backend. Subclasses of the abstract
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` class can add support for additional
  attributes and methods beyond those defined in
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2`, but these will not be supported
  universally throughout Qiskit.

  The other critical change that is primarily important for provider authors is
  how a :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` exposes the properties of
  a particular backend to the transpiler. With
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` this is done via a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object. The
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target`, which is exposed via the
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2.target` attribute, is used to represent
  the set of constraints for running circuits on a particular backend. It
  contains the subset of information previously exposed by the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` classes which the transpiler
  can actively use. When migrating a provider to use
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` (or when creating a new provider
  package) the construction of backend objects will primarily be around
  creating a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object for the backend.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-backend-v2-ce84c976fb13b038.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` class to the
  :mod:`~qiskit.transpiler` module. The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target`
  class is designed to represent the constraints of backend to the compiler.
  The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` class is intended to be used
  with a :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV2` backend and is how backends
  will model their constraints for the transpiler moving forward. It combines
  the previously distinct fields used for controlling the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` target device (e.g. ``basis_gates``,
  ``coupling_map``, ``instruction_durations``, etc) into a single data
  structure. It also adds additional functionality on top of what was
  available previously such as representing heterogeneous gate sets,
  multi-qubit gate connectivity, and tuned variants of the same gates.
  Currently the transpiler doesn't factor in all these constraints, but
  over time it will grow to leverage the extra functionality.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-backend-v2-ce84c976fb13b038.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.Options` class now has optional support for
  specifying validators. This enables :class:`~qiskit.providers.Backend`
  authors to optionally specify basic validation on the user supplied values
  for fields in the :class:`~qiskit.providers.Options` object. For example,
  if you had an :class:`~qiskit.providers.Options` object defined with::

      from qiskit.providers.Options
      options = Options(shots=1024)

  you can set a validator on shots for it to be between 1 and 4096 with::

      options.set_validator('shots', (1, 4096))

  With the validator set any call to the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.Options.update_options` method will check that
  if ``shots`` is being updated the proposed new value is within the valid
  range.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-contains_instruction-pass-dcad5f1978ee1e24.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new transpiler analysis pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ContainsInstruction`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. This pass is used to determine
  if a circuit contains a specific instruction. It takes in a single
  parameter at initialization, the name of the instruction to check for
  and set a boolean in the property set whether the circuit contains that
  instruction or not. For example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ContainsInstruction
    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()

    property_set = {}
    # Contains Hadamard
    contains_h = ContainsInstruction("h")
    contains_h(circuit, property_set)
    assert property_set["contains_h"] == True
    # Not contains SX
    contains_sx = ContainsInstruction("sx")
    contains_sx(circuit, property_set)
    assert property_set["contains_sx"] == False

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-detach-prefix-088e96b88ba29927.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a utility function :func:`qiskit.utils.detach_prefix` that is a
  counterpart of :func:`~qiskit.utils.apply_prefix`.  The new function returns
  a tuple of scaled value and prefix from a given float value.  For example, a
  value ``1.3e8`` will be converted into ``(130, "M")`` that can be used to
  display a value in the user friendly format, such as ``130 MHz``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-gate-error-objective-00a96f75055d1526.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The values ``"gate_error"`` and ``"balanced"`` are now available for the
  ``objective`` option in the construction of the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BIPMapping` object, and ``"balanced"`` is
  now the default.

  The ``"gate_error"`` objective requires passing a
  :obj:`.BackendProperties` instance in the ``backend_prop``
  kwarg, which contains the 2q-gate gate errors used in the computation of the
  objectives.  The ``"balanced"`` objective will use the
  :obj:`.BackendProperties` instance if it is given, but otherwise will assume
  a CX error rate as given in the new parameter ``default_cx_error_rate``.
  The relative weights of the gate-error and depth components of the balanced
  objective can be controlled with the new ``depth_obj_weight`` parameter.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-getters-and-setters-for-vqe-edc753591b368980.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Every attribute of the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` class that is set at
  the initialization is now accessible with getters and setters. Further, the
  default values of the VQE attributes :attr:`~.VQE.ansatz` and
  :attr:`~.VQE.optimizer` can be reset by assigning ``None`` to them::

      vqe = VQE(my_ansatz, my_optimizer)
      vqe.ansatz = None   # reset to default: RealAmplitudes ansatz
      vqe.optimizer = None  # reset to default: SLSQP optimizer

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-group-qubit-wise-commuting-pauli-list-7b96834068a36928.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new method :meth:`.PauliList.group_qubit_wise_commuting` that
  partitions a :obj:`.PauliList` into sets of mutually qubit-wise commuting
  :obj:`.Pauli` operators.  For example::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import PauliList, Pauli
    pauli_list = PauliList([Pauli("IY"), Pauli("XX"), Pauli("YY"), Pauli("YX")])
    pauli_list.group_qubit_wise_commuting()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-hexagonal-lattice-couplingmap-d3b65b146b6cd1d1.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new coupling-map constructor method
  :meth:`.CouplingMap.from_hexagonal_lattice` for constructing a hexagonal
  lattice coupling map.  For example, to construct a 2x2 hexagonal
  lattice coupling map:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
    cmap = CouplingMap.from_hexagonal_lattice(2, 2)
    cmap.draw()

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-new-fake-backends-3376682dc5c63557.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- New fake backend classes are available under ``qiskit.test.mock``. These
  include mocked versions of ``ibmq_brooklyn``, ``ibmq_manila``,
  ``ibmq_jakarta``, and ``ibmq_lagos``. As with the other fake backends, these
  include snapshots of calibration data  (i.e. ``backend.defaults()``) and
  error data (i.e. ``backend.properties()``) taken from the real system, and
  can be used for local testing, compilation and simulation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-opflow-is-hermitian-method-6a461549e3c6b32c.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :meth:`.OperatorBase.is_hermitian` method to check whether the
  operator is Hermitian or not. :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.NumPyEigensolver`
  and :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.NumPyMinimumEigensolver` use ``eigh`` or
  ``eigsh`` to solve the eigenvalue problem when the operator is Hermitian.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-passmanager-config-from-backend-af5dd7d99ec053ef.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new constructor method :meth:`.PassManagerConfig.from_backend`.  It
  constructs a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManagerConfig` object with user
  options and the configuration of a backend.  With this feature, a preset
  passmanager can be built easier. For example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.passmanager_config import PassManagerConfig
    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import level_1_pass_manager
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeMelbourne

    pass_manager = level_1_pass_manager(
      PassManagerConfig.from_backend(FakeMelbourne(), seed_transpiler=42)
    )

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-pulse-gate-pass-dc347177ed541bcc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A new transpiler pass, :class:`.PulseGates`, was added, which automatically
  extracts user-provided calibrations from the instruction schedule map and
  attaches the gate schedule to the given (transpiled) quantum circuit as a
  pulse gate.

  The :class:`.PulseGates` transpiler pass is applied to all optimization
  levels from 0 to 3.  No gate implementation is updated unless the end-user
  explicitly overrides the ``backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map``.
  This pass saves users from individually calling
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.add_calibration` for every circuit run on the
  hardware.

  To supplement this new pass, a schedule was added to
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` and is implicitly updated with
  a metadata field ``"publisher"``.  Backend-calibrated gate schedules have a
  special publisher kind to avoid overriding circuits with calibrations of
  already known schedules.  Usually, end-users don't need to take care of this
  metadata as it is applied automatically.  You can call
  :meth:`.InstructionScheduleMap.has_custom_gate` to check if the map has
  custom gate calibration.

  See the below code example to learn how to apply custom gate implementation
  for all circuits under execution.

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeGuadalupe
    from qiskit import pulse, circuit, transpile

    backend = FakeGuadalupe()

    with pulse.build(backend, name="x") as x_q0:
        pulse.play(pulse.Constant(160, 0.1), pulse.drive_channel(0))

    backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map.add("x", (0,), x_q0)

    circs = []
    for _ in range(100):
        circ = circuit.QuantumCircuit(1)
        circ.sx(0)
        circ.rz(1.57, 0)
        circ.x(0)
        circ.measure_active()
        circs.append(circ)

    circs = transpile(circs, backend)
    circs[0].calibrations  # This returns calibration only for x gate

  Note that the instruction schedule map is a mutable object.
  If you override one of the entries and use that backend for other experiments,
  you may accidentally update the gate definition.

  .. code-block:: python

    backend = FakeGuadalupe()

    instmap = backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map
    instmap.add("x", (0, ), my_x_gate_schedule)

    qc = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
    qc.x(0)
    qc.measure(0, 0)

    qc = transpile(qc, backend)  # This backend uses custom X gate

  If you want to update the gate definitions of a specific experiment,
  you need to first deepcopy the instruction schedule map
  and directly pass it to the transpiler.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-qubit-subset-to-bip-mapper-e1c6234d04484d58.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Introduced a new option ``qubit_subset`` to the constructor of
  :class:`.BIPMapping`.
  The option enables us to specify physical qubits to be used
  (in ``coupling_map`` of the device) during the mapping in one line:

  .. code-block:: python

    mapped_circ = BIPMapping(
        coupling_map=CouplingMap([[0, 1], [1, 2], [1, 3], [3, 4]]),
        qubit_subset=[1, 3, 4]
    )(circ)

  Previously, to do the same thing, we had to supply a reduced ``coupling_map``
  which contains only the qubits to be used, embed the resulting circuit onto
  the original ``coupling_map`` and update the ``QuantumCircuit._layout`` accordingly:

  .. code-block:: python

    reduced_coupling = coupling_map.reduce(qubit_to_use)
    mapped = BIPMapping(reduced_coupling)(circ)
    # skip the definition of fill_with_ancilla()
    # recover circuit on original coupling map
    layout = Layout({q: qubit_to_use[i] for i, q in enumerate(mapped.qubits)})
    for reg in mapped.qregs:
        layout.add_register(reg)
    property_set = {"layout": fill_with_ancilla(layout)}
    recovered = ApplyLayout()(mapped, property_set)
    # recover layout
    overall_layout = Layout({v: qubit_to_use[q] for v, q in mapped._layout.get_virtual_bits().items()})
    for reg in mapped.qregs:
        overall_layout.add_register(reg)
    recovered._layout = fill_with_ancilla(overall_layout)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-sparsepauliop-fast-path-228065a05fca4387.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the ``ignore_pauli_phase`` and ``copy`` arguments to the constructor
  of :obj:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`.  ``ignore_pauli_phase``
  prevents the ``phase`` attribute of an input
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliList` from being read, which is more
  performant if the :obj:`.PauliList` is already known to have all phases as
  zero in the internal ZX convention.  ``copy`` allows users to avoid the copy
  of the input data when they explicitly set ``copy=False``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-sparsepauliop-fast-path-228065a05fca4387.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Improved performance of the following :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` operations:

  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.simplify` (see `#7122 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7122>`__)
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.compose`
    (see `#7126 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7126>`__)
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp._add`
    (see `#7138 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7138>`__)
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.from_list` and :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliList.__init__`
    (see other discussion in `#7138 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7138>`__).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-sparsepauliop-sum-d55fc817c9fded82.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :meth:`.SparsePauliOp.sum` method to add together many
  :class:`.SparsePauliOp`\ s.  This method has significantly better
  performance than adding the instances together in a loop.  For example, the
  previous way to add several :class:`.SparsePauliOp`\ s together would be to
  do::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp, random_pauli_list
      sparse_ops = [SparsePauliOp(random_pauli_list(10, 10)) for _ in [None]*1000]

      total = sparse_ops[0]
      for op in sparse_ops[1:]:
          total += op

  This can now be done far more efficiently (in both speed and typing!) as::

      SparsePauliOp.sum(sparse_ops)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-support-to-disable-amplitude-limit-in-parametric-pulses-ef88b77db8c1b06c.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added an argument ``limit_amplitude`` to the constructor of
  ``ParametricPulse``, which is the base class of :obj:`.Gaussian`,
  :obj:`.GaussianSquare`, :obj:`.Drag` and :obj:`.Constant`, to allowing
  disabling the amplitude limit of 1 on a pulse-by-pulse basis.  With
  ``limit_amplitude=False``, individual pulses may have an amplitude exceeding
  unity without raising a :class:`.PulseError`.  See `#6544
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6544>`__ for more
  detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/added-multiformat-support-b5d3c7c7c1536951.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Using :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` or :func:`.circuit_drawer` with the
  ``latex`` drawer will now generate a file in an image format inferred from the
  filename extension, for example::

    import qiskit

    circuit = qiskit.QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.draw('latex', filename='./file.jpg')

  This will save the circuit drawing in the JPEG format.  Previously, the
  image always be in PNG format.  Refer to `#6448
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6448>`__ for more details.

  Now, if it encounters a filename extension which is not supported, for example::

    circuit.draw('latex', filename='./file.spooky')

  it will raise a ``ValueError`` to change the filename extension to a supported image format.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/added-snapshot-tests-for-backend-mapping-functions-5961300e09f05be0.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the parameter  ``filename`` to
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_gate_map` and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_coupling_map`, which allows saving the
  resulting images to a file.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/approxiamte-quantum-compiler-3c74652d4c5e9fa6.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Introduced an approximate quantum compiler and a corresponding unitary
  synthesis plugin implementation. The main AQC class is
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.synthesis.aqc.AQC` for a standalone version that
  compiles a unitary matrix into an approximate circuit. The plugin may be
  invoked by :func:`~.compiler.transpile` when the
  ``unitary_synthesis_method`` argument is set to ``'aqc'``.  See
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.synthesis.aqc` for full details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/circuit-size-depth-filter-function-2177a8a71588f915.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a ``filter_function`` argument to
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.depth` and
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.size` in order to
  analyze circuit operations according to some criteria.

  For example, to get the number of two-qubit gates, you can do::

    circuit.size(lambda x: x[0].num_qubits == 2)

  Or to get the depth of T gates acting on the zeroth qubit::

    circuit.depth(lambda x: x[0].name == 't' and circuit.qubits[0] in x[1])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/collect-block-pass-b15031aa9749d735.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CollectMultiQBlocks`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. This pass is used to collect
  sequences of uninterrupted gates acting on groups of qubits. It provides
  a similar function to the existing
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Collect2qBlocks` pass, but while that
  pass is designed and optimized to find 2 qubit blocks this new pass will
  work to find blocks of any size.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/control-flow-builder-interface-63910843f8bea5e0.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- There is a builder interface for the new control-flow operations on
  :obj:`.QuantumCircuit`, such as the new :obj:`.ForLoopOp`, :obj:`.IfElseOp`,
  and :obj:`.WhileLoopOp`.  The interface uses the same circuit methods,
  *i.e.* :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.for_loop`, :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.if_test` and
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.while_loop`, which are overloaded so that if the
  ``body`` parameter is not given, they return a context manager.  Entering
  one of these context managers pushes a scope into the circuit, and captures
  all gate calls (and other scopes) and the resources these use, and builds up
  the relevant operation at the end.  For example, you can now do::

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
      with qc.for_loop(range(5)) as i:
          qc.rx(i * math.pi / 4, 0)

  This will produce a :obj:`.ForLoopOp` on ``qc``, which knows that qubit 0 is
  the only resource used within the loop body.  These context managers can be
  nested, and will correctly determine their widths.  You can use
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.break_loop` and :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.continue_loop`
  within a context, and it will expand to be the correct width for its
  containing loop, even if it is nested in further
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.if_test` blocks.

  The :meth:`~.QuantumCircuit.if_test` context manager provides a chained
  manager which, if desired, can be used to create an ``else`` block, such as
  by::

      qreg = QuantumRegister(2)
      creg = ClassicalRegister(2)
      qc = QuantumCircuit(qreg, creg)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.measure(0, 0)
      with qc.if_test((creg, 0)) as else_:
          qc.x(1)
      with else_:
          qc.z(1)

  The manager will ensure that the ``if`` and ``else`` bodies are defined over
  the same set of resources.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/cx-cancellation-pass-generalization-538fb7cfe49b3fd5.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Introduced a new transpiler pass :obj:`.InverseCancellation` that generalizes the :obj:`.CXCancellation`
  pass to cancel any self-inverse gates or gate-inverse pairs. It can be used by
  initializing :obj:`.InverseCancellation` and passing a gate to cancel, for example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import InverseCancellation
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit.library import HGate
    from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.h(0)
    pass_ = InverseCancellation([HGate()])
    pm = PassManager(pass_)
    new_circ = pm.run(qc)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecate-backend-rzx-cal-build-8eda1526725d7e7d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The constructor of :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilder`
  has two new kwargs ``instruction_schedule_map`` and ``qubit_channel_mapping``
  which take a :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` and list of
  channel name lists for each qubit respectively. These new arguments are used
  to directly specify the information needed from a backend target. They should
  be used instead of passing a :class:`~qiskit.providers.BaseBackend` or
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` object directly to the pass with the
  ``backend`` argument.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/draw-statevector-in-ket-notation-0726959d1f6ea3ce.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :obj:`.Statevector`\ s of states comprised only of qubits can now be
  drawn in LaTeX in ket notation.  In ket notation the entries of the
  statevector are processed such that exact factors like fractions or square
  roots of two are drawn as such.  The particular convention can be chosen by
  passing the ``convention`` keyword argument as either ``"ket"`` or
  ``"vector"`` as appropriate::

      import math
      from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

      sv = Statevector([math.sqrt(0.5), 0, 0, -math.sqrt(0.5)])
      sv.draw("latex", convention="ket")
      sv.draw("latex", convention="vector")

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/echo-rzx-weyl-decomposition-ef72345a58bea9e0.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new transpiler pass :class:`.EchoRZXWeylDecomposition` that allows
  users to decompose an arbitrary two-qubit gate in terms of echoed RZX-gates
  by leveraging Cartan's decomposition.  In combination with other transpiler
  passes, this can be used to transpile arbitrary circuits to RZX-gate-based
  and pulse-efficient circuits that implement the same unitary.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/ensure-qnspsa-batching-e48f7ec72412c071.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` and
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA` optimizer classes are now
  capable of batching as many circuit evaluations as possible for both the
  iterations and the initial calibrations. This can be leveraged by setting
  the ``max_evals_grouped`` kwarg on the constructor for
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` when using either
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` or
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA` as the ``optimizer`` parameter.
  For example::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import TwoLocal
      from qiskit.algorithms import VQE
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import QNSPSA
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeMontreal

      backend = FakeMontreal()
      ansatz = TwoLocal(2, rotation_blocks=["ry", "rz"], entanglement_blocks="cz")
      qnspsa = QNSPSA(fidelity, maxiter=5)
      vqe = VQE(
          ansatz=ansatz,
          optimizer=qnspsa,
          max_evals_grouped=100,
          quantum_instance=backend,
      )

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/feature-rzx-decomposition-c3b5a36b88303c1f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- This release introduces a decomposition method for two-qubit gates which
  targets user-defined sets of RZX gates.  Transpiler users can enable
  decomposition for {``RZX(pi/2)``, ``RZX(pi/4)``, and ``RZX(pi/6)``} specifically by including
  ``'rzx'`` in their ``basis_gates`` list when calling
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`.  Quantum information package users can
  find the method itself under the :obj:`.XXDecomposer` class.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/feature_optimize_1q_commutation-28530970f58fb21e.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a transpiler pass :obj:`.Optimize1qGatesSimpleCommutation`, which optimizes
  a circuit according to a strategy of commuting single-qubit gates around to
  discover resynthesis opportunities.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-infinite-job-submissions-d6f6a583535ca798.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a ``max_job_tries`` parameter to :obj:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance`,
  to limit the number of times a job will attempt to be executed on a backend.
  Previously the submission and fetching of results would be attempted
  infinitely, even if the job was cancelled or errored on the backend.  The
  default is now 50, and the previous behaviour can be achieved by setting
  ``max_job_tries=-1``.  Fixes `#6872
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6872>`__ and `#6821
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6821>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-latex-drawer-bit-cond-d629c04a08e81d6d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``latex`` output method for the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method can now
  draw circuits that contain gates with single bit condition. This was added for
  compatibility of latex drawer with the new feature of supporting classical
  conditioning of gates on single classical bits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-mpl-drawer-bit-condition-90c4dac2defdd8c6.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``"mpl"`` output method for the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method can now
  draw circuits that contain gates with single bit condition. This was added for
  compatibility of the ``"mpl"`` drawer with the new feature of supporting classical
  conditioning of gates on single classical bits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-text-drawer-bit-cond-a3b02f0b0b6e3ec2.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``text`` output method for the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` method can now
  draw circuits that contain gates with single bit condition. This was added for
  compatibility of text drawer with the new feature of supporting classical
  conditioning of gates on single classical bits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/gates-in-basis-pass-337f6637e61919db.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A new analysis transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.GatesInBasis`, was added to
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes`. This pass is used to check if the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` being transpiled has all the gates
  in the configured basis set or not. It will set the attribute
  ``"all_gates_in_basis"`` in the property set to ``True`` if all the gates
  in the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` are in the configured basis
  set or ``False`` if they are not. For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import GatesInBasis

    # Instatiate Pass
    basis_gates = ["cx", "h"]
    basis_check_pass = GatesInBasis(basis_gates)
    # Build circuit
    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()
    # Run pass on circuit
    property_set = {}
    basis_check_pass(circuit, property_set=property_set)
    assert property_set["all_gates_in_basis"]

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/heavy-hex-heavy-square-coupling-map-29f459b93cd18518.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added two new constructor methods,
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_heavy_hex` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_heavy_square`, to the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` class. These constructor methods
  are used to create a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` that are
  a heavy hex or heavy square graph as described in |Chamberland2020|_.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap

    cmap = CouplingMap.from_heavy_hex(5)
    cmap.draw()


  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap

    cmap = CouplingMap.from_heavy_square(5)
    cmap.draw()

  .. |Chamberland2020| replace:: Chamberland *et al.*, 2020
  .. _Chamberland2020: https://journals.aps.org/prx/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.011022

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/hhl-negative-eigenvalues-ef11d231181e8043.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :obj:`.HHL` algorithm can now find solutions when its matrix has negative eigenvalues.
  To enable this, the algorithm now adds an extra qubit to represent the sign of the value,
  and the helper algorithm :obj:`.ExactReciprocal` was updated to process this
  new information.  See `#6971
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/6971>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/ignis-mitigators-70492690cbcf99ca.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added two new classes, :class:`~qiskit.utils.mitigation.CompleteMeasFitter`
  and :class:`~qiskit.utils.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter` to the
  :mod:`qiskit.utils.mitigation` module. These classes are for use only as
  values for the ``measurement_error_mitigation_cls`` kwarg of the
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class. The instantiation and usage
  of these classes (or anything else in :mod:`qiskit.utils.mitigation`)
  outside of the ``measurement_error_mitigation_cls`` kwarg should be treated as an
  internal private API and not relied upon.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/listops-coeffs-1e04a34b46b2fd23.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :obj:`.ListOp` class in :mod:`qiskit.opflow` now has a
  :attr:`~.ListOp.coeffs` attribute, which returns a list of the coefficients
  of the operator list, with the overall coefficient (:obj:`.ListOp.coeff`)
  distributed multiplicatively into the list.  Note that :obj:`.ListOp`
  objects may be nested (contained in ``oplist`` of a  :obj:`.ListOp` object),
  and in these cases an exception is raised if the `coeffs` method is called.
  The :obj:`.ListOp.coeffs` method conveniently duck-types against the
  ``coeffs`` property method of the non-nesting :obj:`.PauliSumOp` class.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/make-statevector-subscriptable-and-add-inner-product_method-a0337393d9a5b666.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` class is now subscriptable.
  User can now retrieve the nth coefficient in a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` by index as ``statevec[n]``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/make-statevector-subscriptable-and-add-inner-product_method-a0337393d9a5b666.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :obj:`.Statevector.inner` method to calculate inner products of
  :class:`.Statevector` instances.  For example::

      statevec_inner_other = statevec.inner(other)

  will return the inner product of ``statevec`` with ``other``.  While
  ``statevec`` must be a :class:`.Statevector`, ``other`` can be anything
  that can be constructed into a :class:`.Statevector`, such as a Numpy array.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/measure_all-add_bits-8525317935197b90.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new parameter, ``add_bits``, to :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.measure_all`.
  By default it is set to ``True`` to maintain the previous behaviour of adding a new :obj:`.ClassicalRegister` of the same size as the number of qubits to store the measurements.
  If set to ``False``, the measurements will be stored in the already existing classical bits.
  For example, if you created a circuit with existing classical bits like::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

      qr = QuantumRegister(2)
      cr = ClassicalRegister(2, "meas")
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(qr, cr)

  calling ``circuit.measure_all(add_bits=False)`` will use the existing
  classical register ``cr`` as the output target of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Measurement` objects added to the circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/more-forgiving-numeric-conversions-in-ParameterExpression-6cd7316c32c67c55.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- :obj:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` now delegates its numeric
  conversions to the underlying symbolic library, even if there are
  potentially unbound parameters.  This allows conversions of expressions such
  as::

    >>> from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    >>> x = Parameter('x')
    >>> float(x - x + 2.3)
    2.3

  where the underlying expression has a fixed value, but the parameter ``x``
  is not yet bound.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/optimizer-minimize-5a5a1e9d67db441a.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added an :meth:`.Optimizer.minimize` method to all optimizers:
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer` and derived classes.
  This method mimics the signature of SciPy's ``minimize()`` function and
  returns an :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.OptimizerResult`.

  For example

  .. code-block:: python

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import COBYLA

      def loss(x):
          return -(x[0] - 1) ** 2 - (x[1] + 1) ** 3

      initial_point = np.array([0, 0])
      optimizer = COBYLA()
      result = optimizer.minimize(loss, initial_point)

      optimal_parameters = result.x
      minimum_value = result.fun
      num_function_evals = result.nfev

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/pauli-evolution-gate-ad767a3e43714fa7.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliEvolutionGate` to the circuit
  library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`) which defines a gate performing time
  evolution of (sums or sums-of-sums of) :obj:`.Pauli`\ s. The synthesis of
  this gate is performed by :class:`~qiskit.synthesis.EvolutionSynthesis` and
  is decoupled from the gate itself. Currently available synthesis methods
  are:

  * :class:`~qiskit.synthesis.LieTrotter`: first order Trotterization
  * :class:`~qiskit.synthesis.SuzukiTrotter`: higher order Trotterization
  * :class:`~qiskit.synthesis.MatrixExponential`: exact, matrix-based evolution

  For example::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library import PauliEvolutionGate
      from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
      from qiskit.synthesis import SuzukiTrotter

      operator = SparsePauliOp.from_list([
          ("XIZ", 0.5), ("ZZX", 0.5), ("IYY", -1)
      ])
      time = 0.12  # evolution time
      synth = SuzukiTrotter(order=4, reps=2)

      evo = PauliEvolutionGate(operator, time=time, synthesis=synth)

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(3)
      circuit.append(evo, range(3))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/plot_coupling_map-new-function-deb973b1bf0ad92f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A new function :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_coupling_map()` has been introduced, which
  extends the functionality of the existing function
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_gate_map()`, by accepting three parameters: ``num_qubit``,
  ``qubit_coordinates``, and ``coupling_map`` (instead of ``backend``), to allow an arbitrary
  qubit coupling map to be plotted.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qasm3_dumps-7475de655e1acb24.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Qiskit Terra now has initial support for serializing
  :class:`.QuantumCircuit`\ s to `OpenQASM 3 <https://github.com/Qiskit/openqasm>`__:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister
      from qiskit import qasm3

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)

      print(qasm3.dumps(qc))

  This initial release has limited support for named registers, basic built-in
  instructions (such as measure, barrier and reset), user-defined gates,
  user-defined instructions (as subroutines), and the new control-flow constructs
  also introduced in this release:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister
      from qiskit import qasm3
      import math

      composite_circ_qreg = QuantumRegister(2)
      composite_circ = QuantumCircuit(composite_circ_qreg, name="composite_circ")
      composite_circ.h(0)
      composite_circ.x(1)
      composite_circ.cx(0, 1)
      composite_circ_gate = composite_circ.to_gate()

      qr = QuantumRegister(2, "qr")
      cr = ClassicalRegister(2, "cr")
      qc = QuantumCircuit(qr, cr)
      with qc.for_loop(range(4)) as i:
          qc.rx(i * math.pi / 4, 0)
          qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.barrier()
      qc.append(composite_circ_gate, [0, 1])
      qc.measure([0, 1], [0, 1])

      print(qasm3.dumps(qc))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qdrift-as-product-formula-044a37a106a45a47.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.opflow.evolutions.QDrift` class was reformulated as a
  synthesis method for :obj:`.PauliEvolutionGate`, deriving from
  :obj:`~qiskit.opflow.evolutions.TrotterizationBase`.

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library import PauliEvolutionGate
      from qiskit.synthesis import QDrift
      from qiskit.opflow import X, Y, Z

      qdrift = QDrift(reps=2)
      operator = (X ^ 3) + (Y ^ 3) + (Z ^ 3)
      time = 2.345  # evolution time

      evolution_gate = PauliEvolutionGate(operator, time, synthesis=qdrift)

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(3)
      circuit.append(evolution_gate, range(3))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qpy-v2-f1c380b40936cccf.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- QPY serialization is now capable of representing
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` attributes of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object that are an ``int``,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` object, or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` object. Previous versions of
  QPY would only accept a :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase`
  that was a ``float``.

  This requires the QPY format :ref:`version_2` which was introduced in
  this release to represent the additional types.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/quantumcircuit-consolidate-bit_indices-c4ee90e831f1aed2.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A new :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.find_bit` method has
  been added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class,
  which allows lookups of the index and registers of a provided
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` on the given circuit. The method
  returns a two-element ``namedtuple`` containing 0) the index of the ``Bit``
  in either :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qubits` (for
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit`) or
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.clbits` (for a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit`) and 1) a list of length-2 tuples
  containing each circuit :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` which
  contains the ``Bit``, and the index in that ``Register`` at which the
  ``Bit`` can be found.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, Qubit

      reg1 = QuantumRegister(3, 'foo')
      qubit = Qubit()
      reg2 = QuantumRegister(2, 'bar')

      qc = QuantumCircuit(reg1, [qubit], reg2)

      print(qc.find_bit(reg1[2]))
      print(qc.find_bit(qubit))

  would generate:

  .. code-block:: python

      BitLocations(index=2, registers=[(QuantumRegister(3, 'foo'), 2)])
      BitLocations(index=3, registers=[])

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/quantumcircuit-dynamic-instructions-a69db25665739004.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Three new :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` subclasses have been added
  to support control flow operations in dynamic circuits:
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.WhileLoopOp`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ForLoopOp`,
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.IfElseOp`. Additionally, two
  subclasses, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.BreakLoopOp`,
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ContinueLoopOp`, have been added to
  support breaking from and continuing to the next iteration of a loop
  context, respectively.

  These can be created as stand-alone :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction`\ s,
  or appended to an existing :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` instance
  via their respective methods,
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.while_loop`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.for_loop`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.if_test`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.if_else`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.break_loop`,
  and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.continue_loop`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/readout-mitigation-classes-2ef175e232d791ae.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :class:`~qiskit.result.BaseReadoutMitigator` abstract base class
  for implementing classical measurement error mitigators. These objects
  are intended for mitigation measurement errors in
  :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` objects returned from execution of circuits
  on backends with measurement errors.

  Readout mitigator classes have two main methods:

  * :meth:`~.BaseReadoutMitigator.expectation_value` which computes an
    mitigated expectation value and standard error of a diagonal operator from
    a noisy :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object.

  * :meth:`~.BaseReadoutMitigator.quasi_probabilities` that computes an error
    mitigated :class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution`, including standard
    error, from a noisy counts object.

  Note that currently the :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` module and the
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class still use the legacy mitigators
  migrated from Qiskit Ignis in :mod:`qiskit.utils.mitigation`. It is planned
  to upgrade the module to use the new mitigator classes and deprecate the legacy
  mitgation code in a future release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/readout-mitigation-classes-2ef175e232d791ae.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :class:`~qiskit.result.LocalReadoutMitigator` class for
  performing measurement readout error mitigation of local measurement
  errors. Local measuerment errors are those that are described by a
  tensor-product of single-qubit measurement errors.

  This class can be initialized with a list of :math:`N` single-qubit of
  measurement error assignment matrices or from a backend using the readout
  error information in the backend properties.

  Mitigation is implemented using local assignment-matrix inversion which has
  complexity of :math:`O(2^N)` for :math:`N`-qubit mitigation of
  :class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution` and expectation values.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/readout-mitigation-classes-2ef175e232d791ae.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added the :class:`~qiskit.result.CorrelatedReadoutMitigator` class for
  performing measurement readout error mitigation of correlated measurement
  errors. This class can be initialized with a single :math:`2^N \times 2^N`
  measurement error assignment matrix that descirbes the error probabilities.
  Mitigation is implemented via inversion of assigment matrix which has
  mitigation complexity of :math:`O(4^N)` of
  :class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution` and expectation values.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/readout-mitigation-classes-2ef175e232d791ae.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a :attr:`.QuasiDistribution.stddev_upper_bound`
  attribute and a kwarg to the constructor of the :class:`.QuasiDistribution`
  class, which is used for storing standard errors in quasi-probability
  estimates. This is used by :class:`~qiskit.result.BaseReadoutMitigator`
  classes to store the standard error in mitigated quasi probabilities.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/readout-mitigation-classes-2ef175e232d791ae.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a :meth:`~qiskit.result.Counts.shots` method to
  :class:`qiskit.result.Counts` to return the sum of all outcomes in
  the counts.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/refactor-grover-isgoodstate-check-54fdb61f899e5158.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- When running the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.Grover` algorithm class if the
  optimal power is known and only a single circuit is run, the
  :attr:`.AmplificationProblem.is_good_state` callback function is no longer
  required to be set and the Grover search will return the most likely
  bitstring.  Generally, if the optimal power of the Grover operator is not
  known, the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.Grover` algorithm checks different
  powers (i.e.  iterations) and applies the
  :attr:`~qiskit.algorithms.AmplificationProblem.is_good_state` function to
  check whether a good bitstring has been measured.  For example, you are now
  able to run something like::

    from qiskit.algorithms import Grover, AmplificationProblem
    from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    # Fixed Grover power: 2.
    grover = Grover(iterations=2, quantum_instance=AerSimulator())

    # The ``is_good_state`` argument not required here since Grover search
    # will be run only once, with a power of 2.
    problem = AmplificationProblem(Statevector.from_label("111"))

    # Run Grover search and print the best measurement
    result = grover.amplify(problem)
    print(result.top_measurement)  # should print 111

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added method :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.remove_cregs`
  to class :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` to support classical
  register removal.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added method :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.remove_clbits`
  to class :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` to support the removal
  of idle classical bits. Any classical registers referencing a removed bit
  are also removed.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/replace-block-with-op-e0d387f6d860d586.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.replace_block_with_op`, to the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class. This method is used to replace
  a block of nodes in the DAG with a single operation. The canonical example
  is for the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ConsolidateBlocks` pass which
  replaces blocks of nodes with equivalent
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` nodes.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/replace-block-with-op-e0d387f6d860d586.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new analysis transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Collect1qRuns`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. This pass is used to find sequences
  of uninterrupted gates acting on a single qubit. It is similar to the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Collect2qBlocks` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CollectMultiQBlocks` but optimized for
  single qubit runs instead of multiple qubit blocks.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/retworkx-substitute_node_with_dag-speedup-d7d1f0d33716131d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Various transpilation internals now use new features in `retworkx
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx>`__ 0.10 when operating on the internal
  circuit representation.  This can often result in speedups in calls to
  :obj:`~.compiler.transpile` of around 10-40%, with greater effects at higher
  optimization levels.  See `#6302
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/6302>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/squ-gate-name-785b7896300a92ef.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis` transpiler pass in
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` has a new kwarg in the constructor,
  ``min_qubits``. When specified this can be set to an ``int`` value which
  is the minimum size :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` object to
  run the unitary synthesis on. If a :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate`
  in a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` uses fewer qubits it will
  be skipped by that instance of the pass.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/support-dict-for-aux-operators-c3c9ad380c208afd.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :obj:`.Eigensolver` and :obj:`.MinimumEigensolver` interfaces now support the type
  ``Dict[str, Optional[OperatorBase]]`` for the ``aux_operators`` parameter in their respective
  :meth:`~.Eigensolver.compute_eigenvalues` and :meth:`~.MinimumEigensolver.compute_minimum_eigenvalue` methods.
  In this case, the auxiliary eigenvalues are also stored in a dictionary under the same keys
  provided by the ``aux_operators`` dictionary. Keys that correspond to an operator that does not commute
  with the main operator are dropped.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/target-in-transpiler-c0a97bd33ad9417d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.GateDirection`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckGateDirection` transpiler passes have
  a new ``target`` kwarg in their constructors, which can be used to set
  a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object as the target for the pass. If
  it is set it will be used instead of the ``target_basis`` (in the case of
  the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` pass) or
  ``coupling_map`` (in the case of the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.GateDirection` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckGateDirection` passes) arguments.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/two-step-transpile-f20d709a7a0c42dd.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Allow two transpiler stages in the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance`, one for
  parameterized circuits and a second one for bound circuits (i.e. no free parameters) only.
  If a quantum instance with passes for unbound and bound circuits is passed into a
  :class:`.CircuitSampler`, the sampler will attempt to apply the unbound pass
  once on the parameterized circuit, cache it, and only apply the bound pass for all future
  evaluations.

  This enables variational algorithms like the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` to run a
  custom pass manager for parameterized circuits once and, additionally, another the transpiler
  again with a different custom pass manager on the bound circuits in each iteration. Being able
  to run different pass managers is important because not all passes support parameterized
  circuits (for example :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition` only
  works with bound circuit parameters).

  For example, this feature allows using the pulse-efficient CX decomposition in the VQE, as

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms import VQE
      from qiskit.opflow import Z
      from qiskit.circuit.library.standard_gates.equivalence_library import StandardEquivalenceLibrary as std_eqlib
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, PassManagerConfig, CouplingMap
      from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import level_1_pass_manager
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import (
          Collect2qBlocks, ConsolidateBlocks, Optimize1qGatesDecomposition,
          RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho, UnrollCustomDefinitions, BasisTranslator
      )
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes.optimization.echo_rzx_weyl_decomposition import EchoRZXWeylDecomposition
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeBelem
      from qiskit.utils import QuantumInstance

      # Replace by a real backend! If not ensure qiskit-aer is installed to simulate the backend
      backend = FakeBelem()

      # Build the pass manager for the parameterized circuit
      rzx_basis = ['rzx', 'rz', 'x', 'sx']
      coupling_map = CouplingMap(backend.configuration().coupling_map)
      config = PassManagerConfig(basis_gates=rzx_basis, coupling_map=coupling_map)
      pre = level_1_pass_manager(config)

      # Build a pass manager for the CX decomposition (works only on bound circuits)
      post = PassManager([
          # Consolidate consecutive two-qubit operations.
          Collect2qBlocks(),
          ConsolidateBlocks(basis_gates=['rz', 'sx', 'x', 'rxx']),

          # Rewrite circuit in terms of Weyl-decomposed echoed RZX gates.
          EchoRZXWeylDecomposition(backend),

          # Attach scaled CR pulse schedules to the RZX gates.
          RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho(backend),

          # Simplify single-qubit gates.
          UnrollCustomDefinitions(std_eqlib, rzx_basis),
          BasisTranslator(std_eqlib, rzx_basis),
          Optimize1qGatesDecomposition(rzx_basis),
      ])

      quantum_instance = QuantumInstance(backend, pass_manager=pre, bound_pass_manager=post)

      vqe = VQE(quantum_instance=quantum_instance)
      result = vqe.compute_minimum_eigenvalue(Z ^ Z)

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/unitary-synthesis-plugin-a5ec21a1906149fa.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Introduced a new unitary synthesis plugin interface which is used to enable
  using alternative synthesis techniques included in external packages
  seamlessly with the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis`
  transpiler pass. Users can select a plugin to use when calling
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` by setting the
  ``unitary_synthesis_method`` kwarg to the plugin's name. A full list of
  installed plugins can be found using the
  :func:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.plugin.unitary_synthesis_plugin_names`
  function. For example, if you installed a package that includes a synthesis
  plugin named ``special_synth`` you could use it with::

    from qiskit import transpile

    transpile(qc, unitary_synthesis_method='special_synth', optimization_level=3)

  This will replace all uses of the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis`
  with the method included in the external package that exports the ``special_synth``
  plugin.

  The plugin interface is built around setuptools
  `entry points <https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/userguide/entry_point.html>`__
  which enable packages external to Qiskit to advertise they include a
  synthesis plugin. For details on writing a new plugin refer to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.plugin` module documentation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/vf2layout-4cea88087c355769.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Added a new transpiler pass, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout`.
  This pass models the layout allocation problem as a subgraph isomorphism
  problem and uses the `VF2 algorithm`_ implementation in `retworkx
  <https://qiskit.org/documentation/retworkx/stubs/retworkx.vf2_mapping.html>`__
  to find a perfect layout (a layout which would not require additional
  routing) if one exists. The functionality exposed by this new pass is very
  similar to exisiting :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` but
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.VF2Layout` is significantly faster.

  .. _VF2 algorithm: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.101.5342&rep=rep1&type=pdf

.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/draw-statevector-in-ket-notation-0726959d1f6ea3ce.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``"ket"`` convention in the ``"latex"`` drawer of :meth:`.Statevector.draw`
  is only valid for states comprising purely of qubits.  If you are using states
  with some spaces of dimension greater than two, you should either pass
  ``convention="vector"``, or use a different drawer.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qasm3-limitations-ebfdedab3f4ab6e1.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The OpenQASM 3 export capabilities are in a beta state, and some features of
  Qiskit Terra's :obj:`.QuantumCircuit` are not yet supported.  In particular, you
  may see errors if you try to export custom subroutines with classical
  parameters, and there is no provision yet for exporting pulse-calibrated
  operations into `OpenPulse <https://qiskit.github.io/openqasm/language/openpulse.html>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/target-in-transpiler-c0a97bd33ad9417d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- When running the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` in
  isolation with the ``target`` argument set to a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target` object, where some single-qubit gates
  can only apply to non-overlapping sets of qubits, the output circuit might
  incorrectly include operations on a qubit that are not allowed by the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Target`.  For example, if you ran::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Parameter
      from qiskit.circuit.library import UGate, RZGate, XGate, SXGate, CXGate
      from qiskit.circuit.equivalence_library import SessionEquivalenceLibrary as sel

      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, Target, InstructionProperties
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import BasisTranslator

      gmap = Target()

      # U gate in qubit 0.
      theta = Parameter('theta')
      phi = Parameter('phi')
      lam = Parameter('lambda')
      u_props = {
          (0,): InstructionProperties(duration=5.23e-8, error=0.00038115),
      }
      gmap.add_instruction(UGate(theta, phi, lam), u_props)

      # Rz gate in qubit 1.
      phi = Parameter("phi")
      rz_props = {
          (1,): InstructionProperties(duration=0.0, error=0),
      }
      gmap.add_instruction(RZGate(phi), rz_props)

      # X gate in qubit 1.
      x_props = {
          (1,): InstructionProperties(
              duration=3.5555555555555554e-08, error=0.00020056469709026198
          ),
      }
      gmap.add_instruction(XGate(), x_props)

      # SX gate in qubit 1.
      sx_props = {
          (1,): InstructionProperties(
              duration=3.5555555555555554e-08, error=0.00020056469709026198
          ),
      }
      gmap.add_instruction(SXGate(), sx_props)

      cx_props = {
          (0, 1): InstructionProperties(duration=5.23e-7, error=0.00098115),
          (1, 0): InstructionProperties(duration=4.52e-7, error=0.00132115),
      }
      gmap.add_instruction(CXGate(), cx_props)

      bt_pass = BasisTranslator(sel, target_basis=None, target=gmap)

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
      qc.iswap(0, 1)
      output = bt_pass(qc)

  ``output`` will have :class:`.RZGate` and :class:`.SXGate` on qubit 0, even
  though this is forbidden. To correct this you can normally run the basis
  translator a second time (i.e.  ``output = bt_pass(output)`` in the above
  example) to correct this. This should not affect the output of running the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function and is only an issue if you run
  the pass by itself.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/7274-6f57628a7995a461.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Starting with this version, ``from qiskit import *`` will not import submodules, but
  only a selected list of objects.  This might break existing code using
  ``from qiskit import *`` and referring to objects that are not part of the
  current namespace.  As a reminder, ``import *`` is  considered bad practice
  and it should not be used in production code.  Qiskit sets ``__all__`` in
  ``qiskit/__init__.py`` as a way to mitigate the effects of said bad
  practice.  If your code raises ``name '<something>' is not defined``, add
  ``from qiskit import <something>`` and try again.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-contains_instruction-pass-dcad5f1978ee1e24.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The preset pass managers for optimization levels 0, 1, 2, and 3 which are
  generated by
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_0_pass_manager`,
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_1_pass_manager`,
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_2_pass_manager`, and
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_3_pass_manager`
  respectively will no longer unconditionally run the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TimeUnitConversion`. Previously, the
  preset pass managers would always run this pass regardless of the inputs
  to the transpiler and the circuit. Now this pass will only be run if
  a ``scheduling_method`` parameter is set or the circuit contains a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` instruction and the
  ``instruction_durations`` parameter is set. This change was made in
  the interest of runtime performance as in some cases running
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` on circuits with a large number of gates
  and no delays, timing, or scheduling being used the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TimeUnitConversion` could be the largest
  bottleneck in the transpilation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-gate-error-objective-00a96f75055d1526.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The default method for :obj:`.BIPMapping` is now ``balanced`` rather than
  ``depth``.  This new objective generally achieves a better result, as it
  factors in both the circuit depth and the gate error.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-getters-and-setters-for-vqe-edc753591b368980.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``sort_parameters_by_name`` of the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` class
  has been removed, following its deprecation in Qiskit Terra 0.18.  There is
  no alternative provided, as the new ordering of parameters is the more
  natural sort order.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/added-multiformat-support-b5d3c7c7c1536951.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The circuit drawers :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` and
  :func:`.circuit_drawer` with the ``latex`` option will now save their images
  in a format determined the file extension (if a file name is provided).
  Previously, they would always save in PNG format.  They now raise
  ``ValueError`` if the image format is not known.  This was done to make it
  easier to save the image in different formats.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/bump-retworkx-0.10.1-1fcf4fc746bd754a.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The core dependency ``retworkx`` had its version requirement bumped to 0.10.1, up from 0.9.
  This enables several performance improvements across different transpilation passes.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/dag_node_to_op_in_out_node-af2cf9c3e7686285.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The previously deprecated ``condition`` kwarg, which was deprecated as part
  of the 0.15.0 release, has been removed from
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.apply_operation_back` and
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.apply_operation_front`. Instead set the ``condition``
  attribute on the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` instances being added
  to the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` using :meth:`.Instruction.c_if`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``DAGCircuit.extend_back()`` method has been removed. It was originally
  deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. Instead you can use the
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.compose` method which is more general
  and provides the same functionality.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``DAGCircuit.compose_back()`` method has been removed. It was originally
  deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. Instead you can use the
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.compose` method which is more general
  and provides the same functionality.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``edge_map`` kwarg of the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.compose` has been removed. It was
  originally deprecated in the 0.14.0 release. The method takes a ``qubits``
  and ``clbits`` kwargs to specify the positional order of bits to compose
  onto instead of using a dictionary mapping that ``edge_map`` previously
  provided.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``DAGCircuit.twoQ_gates()`` method has been removed. It was originally
  deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. Instead,
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.two_qubit_ops` should be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``DAGCircuit.threeQ_or_more_gates()`` method has been removed. It was
  originally deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. Instead,
  :meth:`.DAGCircuit.multi_qubit_ops` method should be used.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Named access for the first positional argument for the constructor of
  the :class:`.SingleQubitUnitary` class with ``u`` has been removed.
  It was originally deprecated in the 0.14.0 release. Instead, the first
  positional argument can be set using the name ``unitary_matrix``
  (or just set it positionally instead of by name).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Named access for the first positional argument for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.squ` with ``u`` has been removed.
  It was originally deprecated in the 0.14.0 release. Instead the first
  positional argument can be set using the name ``unitary_matrix``
  (or just set it positionally instead of by name).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The unused ``proc`` and ``nested_scope`` kwargs for the ``qasm()`` method
  of the QASM node classes in the ``qiskit.qasm.node`` module have been
  removed. They were originally deprecated in the 0.15.0 release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The unused ``proc`` and ``nested_scope`` kwargs for the ``latex()`` method
  of the QASM node classes in the ``qiskit.qasm.node`` module have been
  removed. They were originally deprecated in the 0.15.0 release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecation-cleanup-3d3e203e2d6e6f31.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The unused ``proc`` and ``nested_scope`` kwargs for the ``real()`` method
  of the QASM node classes in the ``qiskit.qasm.node`` module have been
  removed. They were originally deprecated in the 0.15.0 release.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/draw-statevector-in-ket-notation-0726959d1f6ea3ce.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The output of :meth:`.Statevector.draw` when using ``"latex"`` output is
  now the new ``"ket"`` convention if plotting a state comprised purely of qubits.
  This was changed to make reading the output clearer, especially in
  educational contexts, because it shows the ket labels, and only displays the
  nonzero elements.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/execute-fix-108e835dc4f4593d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- When running :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` with a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` backend the default values for the
  kwargs ``shots``, ``max_credits``, ``meas_level``, ``meas_return`` and
  ``memory_slot_size`` will now be whatever the set default is on the
  target backend's :attr:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.options` attribute.
  Previously these defaults were set to match the default values when
  calling :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` with a legacy
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BaseBackend` backend. For example::

    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeMumbai
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, execute

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    qc.measure_all()

    backend = FakeMumbai()
    backend.set_options(shots=4096)
    execute(qc, backend)

  will now run with ``4096`` shots. While in previous releases it would run
  with ``1024``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/mpl-bump-33a1240266e66508.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The minimum supported version of Matplotlib has been raised from 2.1.0 to
  3.3.0. You will now need to have Matplotlib 3.3.0 installed if you're using
  Matplotlib-based visualization functions such as the ``'mpl'`` backend for
  the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function or the
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_vector` function. This was done for
  two reasons, the first is because recent versions of Matplotlib have
  deprecated the use of APIs around 3D visualizations that were compatible
  with older releases and second installing older versions of Matplotlib
  was becoming increasingly difficult as matplotlib's upstream dependencies
  have caused incompatiblities that made testing moving forward more
  difficult.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/random-shift-38532a7321cd8313.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The internal use of the random number generator in
  :func:`~qiskit.circuit.random.random_circuit` was adjusted, which will
  change the output from previous versions, even with a fixed seed. This was
  done to greatly improve the runtime scaling with the number of qubits being
  used. If you were depending on an identical output from a previous version
  it is recommended that you use
  :func:`.qpy_serialization.dump` to save the random
  circuit generated with a previous version and instead of re-generating it
  with the new release, and instead just use
  :func:`.qpy_serialization.load` to load that saved circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-ops-2fbd27abaee98c68.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The use of ``*`` (``__mul__``) for the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` method and ``@`` (``__matmul__``)
  for the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` method of
  ``BaseOperator`` (which is the parent of all the operator classes in
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` including classes like
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli`) is no longer supported.  The use of
  these operators were previously deprecated in 0.17.0 release.  Instead you
  should use the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` methods directly, or the ``&``
  operator (``__and__``) can be used for
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose`.  For example, if you were
  previously using the operator like::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import random_hermitian

      op_a = random_hermitian(4)
      op_b = random_hermitian(4)

      new_op = op_a @ op_b

  this should be changed to be::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import random_hermitian

      op_a = random_hermitian(4)
      op_b = random_hermitian(4)
      new_op = op_a.compose(op_b)

  or::

      new_op = op_a & op_b

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Various methods of assigning parameters to operands of pulse program
  instructions have been removed, having been deprecated in Qiskit Terra 0.17.
  These include:

  * the ``assign()`` method of :obj:`.pulse.Instruction`.
  * the ``assign()`` method of ``Channel``, which is the base of
    :obj:`.AcquireChannel`, :obj:`.SnapshotChannel`, :obj:`.MemorySlot` and
    :obj:`.RegisterSlot`.
  * the ``assign()`` and ``assign_parameters()`` methods of
    ``ParametricPulse``, which is the base of :obj:`.pulse.Gaussian`,
    :obj:`.pulse.GaussianSquare`, :obj:`.pulse.Drag` and :obj:`.pulse.Constant`.

  These parameters should be assigned from the pulse program
  (:class:`.pulse.Schedule` and :class:`.pulse.ScheduleBlock`) rather than
  operands of the pulse program instruction.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``flatten()`` method of :class:`.pulse.Instruction` and
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` has been removed and no longer exists as per
  the deprecation notice from Qiskit Terra 0.17. This transformation is
  defined as a standalone function in
  :func:`qiskit.pulse.transforms.canonicalization.flatten`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- ``qiskit.pulse.interfaces.ScheduleComponent`` has been removed and no longer
  exists as per the deprecation notice from Qiskit Terra 0.15. No alternative
  class will be provided.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Legacy pulse drawer arguments have been removed from
  :meth:`.pulse.Waveform.draw`, :meth:`.Schedule.draw` and
  :meth:`.ScheduleBlock.draw` and no longer exist as per the deprecation
  notice from Qiskit Terra 0.16. Now these draw methods support only V2 pulse
  drawer arguments. See method documentations for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``qiskit.pulse.reschedule`` module has been removed and this import path
  no longer exist as per the deprecation notice from Qiskit Terra 0.14. Use
  :mod:`qiskit.pulse.transforms` instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A protected method ``Schedule._children()`` has been removed and replaced by
  a protected instance variable as per the deprecation notice from Qiskit
  Terra 0.17.  This is now provided as a public attribute
  :obj:`.Schedule.children`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Timeslot relevant methods and properties have been removed and no longer
  exist in :class:`~.pulse.ScheduleBlock` as per the deprecation notice from
  Qiskit Terra 0.17.  Since this representation doesn't have notion of
  instruction time ``t0``, the timeslot information will be available after it
  is transformed to a :obj:`~.pulse.Schedule`.  Corresponding attributes have
  been provided after this conversion, but they are no longer supported.  The
  following attributes are removed:

  * ``timeslots``
  * ``start_time``
  * ``stop_time``
  * ``ch_start_time``
  * ``ch_stop_time``
  * ``shift``
  * ``insert``

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Alignment pulse schedule transforms have been removed and no longer exist as
  per the deprecation notice from Qiskit Terra 0.17. These transforms are
  integrated and implemented in the ``AlignmentKind`` context of the schedule
  block.  The following explicit transform functions are removed:

  * ``qiskit.pulse.transforms.align_equispaced``
  * ``qiskit.pulse.transforms.align_func``
  * ``qiskit.pulse.transforms.align_left``
  * ``qiskit.pulse.transforms.align_right``
  * ``qiskit.pulse.transforms.align_sequential``

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-deprecated-pulse-code-57ec531224e45b5f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Redundant pulse builder commands have been removed and no longer exist as
  per the deprecation notice from Qiskit Terra 0.17.
  ``pulse.builder.call_schedule`` and ``pulse.builder.call_circuit`` have been
  integrated into :func:`.pulse.builder.call`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-manual-warning-filters-028646b73bb86860.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- An internal filter override that caused all Qiskit deprecation warnings to
  be displayed has been removed.  This means that the behaviour will now
  revert to the standard Python behaviour for deprecations; you should only
  see a ``DeprecationWarning`` if it was triggered by code in the main script
  file, interpreter session or Jupyter notebook.  The user will no longer be
  blamed with a warning if internal Qiskit functions call deprecated
  behaviour.  If you write libraries, you should occasionally run with the
  default warning filters disabled, or have tests which always run with them
  disabled.  See the `Python documentation on warnings`_, and in particular the
  `section on testing for deprecations`_ for more information on how to do this.

  .. _Python documentation on warnings: https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html
  .. _section on testing for deprecations: https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html#updating-code-for-new-versions-of-dependencies

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-manual-warning-filters-028646b73bb86860.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Certain warnings used to be only issued once, even if triggered from
  multiple places.  This behaviour has been removed, so it is possible that if
  you call deprecated functions, you may see more warnings than you did
  before.  You should change any deprecated function calls to the suggested
  versions, because the deprecated forms will be removed in future Qiskit
  releases.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-schemas-ca9f3f2e0f08bca8.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The deprecated ``qiskit.schemas`` module and the ``qiskit.validation``
  module which build jsonschema validator from the schemas have been removed.
  This was deprecated in the 0.17.0 release and has been replaced with a
  `dedicated repository for the IBM Quantum API payload schemas
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas>`__.

  If you were relying on the schema files previously packaged in
  ``qiskit.schemas`` or the validators built on them you should use that
  repository and create validators from the schema files it contains.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-schemas-ca9f3f2e0f08bca8.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The functions ``qiskit.qobj.validate_qobj_against_schema`` and
  ``qiskit.qobj.common.validator`` along with the ``validate`` kwarg of
  the methods :meth:`.QasmQobj.to_dict`,
  :meth:`.PulseQobj.to_dict`, and :meth:`.Qobj.to_dict`
  have been removed. These were deprecated in the 0.17.0 release. If you were
  using these function you will have to manually build jsonschema validation
  functions for ``Qobj`` objects using the jsonschema files from
  `the dedicated repository for the IBM Quantum API payload schemas <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-schemas-ca9f3f2e0f08bca8.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``fastjsonschema`` and ``jsonschema`` packages are no longer in the requirements
  list for qiskit-terra. The internal use of jsonschema has been removed and
  they are no longer required to use qiskit-terra.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-schemas-ca9f3f2e0f08bca8.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The exception raised by the :func:`~.compiler.assemble` function when
  invalid parameters are passed in for constructing a
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` have changed from a ``SchemaValidationError``
  to a :class:`.QiskitError`. This was necessary because
  the ``SchemaValidationError`` class was removed along with the rest of
  the deprecated ``qiskit.schemas`` and ``qiskit.validation``. This also
  makes it more consistent with other error conditions from
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` which were already raising a
  :class:`.QiskitError`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/sabre-opt-lvl3-default-550924470d683112.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The default routing pass and layout pass for transpiler optimization level 3 has
  changed to use :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreSwap` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreLayout` respectively. This
  was done to improve the quality of the output result, as using the sabre
  passes produces better results than using
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.StochasticSwap` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DenseLayout`, which were used as the
  defaults in prior releases. This change will improve the quality of the
  results when running :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` or
  :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` functions with the
  ``optimization_level`` kwarg set to ``3``. While this is generally an
  improvement, if you need to retain the previous behavior for any reason
  you can do this by explicitly setting the ``routing_method="stochastic"``
  and ``layout_method="dense"`` when calling
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` with ``optimization_level=3``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/sparse-pauli-internal-8226b4f57a61b982.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The return type of :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.pauli_basis` will change from
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` to
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliList` in a future release of Qiskit Terra.
  To immediately swap to the new behaviour, pass the keyword argument
  ``pauli_list=True``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/squ-gate-name-785b7896300a92ef.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :attr:`~qiskit.extensions.SingleQubitUnitary.name` attribute of the
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.SingleQubitUnitary` gate class has been changed
  from ``unitary`` to ``squ``. This was necessary to avoid a conflict with
  the :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` class's name which was also
  ``unitary`` since the 2 gates are not the same and don't have the same
  implementation (and can't be used interchangeably).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/symengine-bump-20dedd5204870e7a.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The minimum version of Symengine__ required for installing has been increased
  to 0.8.0. This was necessary to fix some issues with the handling of
  ``numpy.float16`` and ``numpy.float32`` values when running
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression.bind` to bind parameters in a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression`.

  .. __: https://pypi.org/project/symengine

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/unitary-synthesis-plugin-a5ec21a1906149fa.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- A new dependency `stevedore <https://pypi.org/project/stevedore/>`__ has
  been added to the requirements list. This is required by qiskit-terra as
  it is used to build the unitary synthesis plugin interface.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/QuantumCircuit.decompose-takes-which-gate-to-decompose-d857da5d0c41fb66.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``gate`` attribute and initialization parameter of
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.Decompose` is deprecated, and will be
  removed in a future release.  Instead of this single gate, you should pass a
  list of gate names to the new parameter ``gates_to_decompose``.  This was
  done as the new form allows you to select more than one gate as a
  decomposition target, which is more flexible, and does not need to re-run
  the pass several times to decompose a set of gates.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-pulse-gate-pass-dc347177ed541bcc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- There has been a significant transpiler pass reorganization regarding calibrations.
  The import paths::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes.scheduling.calibration_creators import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes.scheduling.calibration_creators import RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho

  are deprecated, and will be removed in a future release.
  The import path::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes.scheduling.rzx_templates import rzx_templates

  is also deprecated, and will be removed in a future release.
  You should use the new import paths::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes.calibration.rzx_templates import rzx_templates

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/dag_node_to_op_in_out_node-af2cf9c3e7686285.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` class is being deprecated as a
  standalone class and will be used in the future only as the parent class for
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGOpNode`,
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGInNode`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGOutNode`. As part of this deprecation, the
  following kwargs and associated attributes in :obj:`.DAGNode` are also being
  deprecated: ``type``, ``op``, and ``wire``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecate-backend-rzx-cal-build-8eda1526725d7e7d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- For the constructor of the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilder` passing a backend
  either as the first positional argument or with the named ``backend`` kwarg
  is deprecated and will no longer work in a future release. Instead
  a :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` should be passed directly to
  the ``instruction_schedule_map`` kwarg and a list of channel name lists for
  each qubit should be passed directly to ``qubit_channel_mapping``. For example,
  if you were calling the pass like::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeMumbai

      backend = FakeMumbai()
      cal_pass = RZXCalibrationBuilder(backend)

  instead you should call it like::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import RZXCalibrationBuilder
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeMumbai

      backend = FakeMumbai()
      inst_map = backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map
      channel_map = self.backend.configuration().qubit_channel_mapping
      cal_pass = RZXCalibrationBuilder(
          instruction_schedule_map=inst_map,
          qubit_channel_mapping=channel_map,
      )

  This change is necessary because as a general rule backend objects are not
  pickle serializable and it would break when it was used with multiple
  processes inside of :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` when compiling
  multiple circuits at once.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecate-mcmt-label-12865e041ce67658.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The ``label`` property of class
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCMT` and subclass
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCMTVChain` has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Consequently, the
  ``label`` kwarg on the constructor for both classes is also deprecated,
  along with the ``label`` kwarg of method :meth:`.MCMT.control`.
  Currently, the ``label`` property is used to name the controlled target
  when it is comprised of more than one target qubit, however, this was
  never intended to be user-specifiable, and can result in an incorrect
  MCMT gate if the name of a well-known operation is used.
  After deprecation, the ``label`` property will no longer be
  user-specifiable. However, you can get the generated name of the controlled
  target via

  ::

    MCMT.data[0][0].base_gate.name

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/deprecate-subgraph-coupling_map-93af284f5410e4b0.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.subgraph` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` class is deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead the
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.reduce` method should be used, which
  does the same thing except it preserves the node list order for the output
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` (while
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.subgraph` did not preserve list
  order).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-instruction-c_if-3334bc8bcc38a327.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Creating an instance of :obj:`.InstructionSet` with the ``circuit_cregs``
  keyword argument is deprecated.  In general, these classes never need to be
  constructed by users (but are used internally), but should you need to, you
  should pass a callable as the ``resource_requester`` keyword argument.  For
  example::

      from qiskit.circuit import Clbit, ClassicalRegister, InstructionSet
      from qiskit.circuit.exceptions import CircuitError

      def my_requester(bits, registers):
          bits_set = set(bits)
          bits_flat = tuple(bits)
          registers_set = set(registers)

          def requester(specifier):
              if isinstance(specifer, Clbit) and specifier in bits_set:
                  return specifier
              if isinstance(specifer, ClassicalRegster) and specifier in register_set:
                  return specifier
              if isinstance(specifier, int) and 0 <= specifier < len(bits_flat):
                  return bits_flat[specifier]
              raise CircuitError(f"Unknown resource: {specifier}")

          return requester

      my_bits = [Clbit() for _ in [None]*5]
      my_registers = [ClassicalRegister(n) for n in range(3)]

      InstructionSet(resource_requester=my_requester(my_bits, my_registers))

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/ignis-mitigators-70492690cbcf99ca.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The use of the measurement mitigation classes
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.CompleteMeasFitter` and
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter` from ``qiskit-ignis``
  as values for the ``measurement_error_mitigation_cls`` kwarg of the
  constructor for the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class is
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead the equivalent
  classes from :mod:`qiskit.utils.mitigation`,
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.mitigation.CompleteMeasFitter` and
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter` should be used. This
  was necessary as the ``qiskit-ignis`` project is now deprecated and will
  no longer be supported in the near future.
  It's worth noting that unlike the equivalent classes from ``qiskit-ignis``
  the versions from :mod:`qiskit.utils.mitigation` are supported only in
  their use with :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` (i.e. as a class not
  an instance with the ``measurement_error_mitigation_cls`` kwarg) and not
  intended for standalone use.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/optimizer-minimize-5a5a1e9d67db441a.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :meth:`.Optimizer.optimize` method for all the optimizers
  (:class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer` and derived classes) is
  now deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead, the
  :meth:`.Optimizer.minimize` method should be used which mimics the signature
  of SciPy's ``minimize()`` function.

  To replace the current `optimize` call with `minimize` you can replace

  .. code-block:: python

      xopt, fopt, nfev = optimizer.optimize(
          num_vars,
          objective_function,
          gradient_function,
          variable_bounds,
          initial_point,
      )

  with

  .. code-block:: python

      result = optimizer.minimize(
          fun=objective_function,
          x0=initial_point,
          jac=gradient_function,
          bounds=variable_bounds,
      )
      xopt, fopt, nfev = result.x, result.fun, result.nfev

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qiskit.util-louder-deprecation-135d9e9ead7ab396.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Importing the ``qiskit.util`` module will now issue a ``DeprecationWarning``.
  Users should instead import all the same functionality from :obj:`qiskit.utils`.
  The ``util`` module has been deprecated since Terra 0.17, but previously did not issue a warning.
  It will be removed in Terra 0.20.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/sparse-pauli-internal-8226b4f57a61b982.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The property :attr:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.table` is deprecated,
  and will be removed in a future release.  This is because
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` has been updated to internally use
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.operators.PauliList` instead of
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`.  This is in order to significantly
  improve performance.  You should now access the :obj:`.PauliList` data by
  using the :attr:`.SparsePauliOp.paulis` attribute.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/7156-df1a60c608b93184.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a bug where many layout methods would ignore 3-or-more qubit gates,
  resulting in unexpected layout-allocation decisions.  The transpiler pass
  :class:`.Unroll3qOrMore` is now being executed before the layout pass in all
  the preset pass managers when :func:`~.compiler.transpile` is called.  Fixed `#7156
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7156>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-circuit-calibrations-to-diassambler-2e68437a815cc729.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Disassembled circuits now inherit calibrations from assembled
  :obj:`.QasmQobj` and experiments.  Fixes `#5348
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5348>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-getters-and-setters-for-vqe-edc753591b368980.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed setting the ``ansatz`` or ``optimizer`` attributes of a
  :obj:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` instance to ``None`` resulting in a buggy
  behavior.  See `#7093
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7093>`__ for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/add-sparsepauliop-fast-path-228065a05fca4387.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed addition of :obj:`.PauliList`\ s with ``qargs``. The method used to raise a runtime error
  if the operands had different numbers of qubits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/bugfix-6918-4b3cc4056df39e48.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue causing an error when trying to compute a gradient with the
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.gradients.CircuitGradient` class for a gate that was
  not a supported gate. This bugfix transpiles a given gate to the set of
  supported gates for a requested gradient method.  Fixes `#6918
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6918>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/calibration_results-ac2f9f75479e8d64.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Removed calibration results when using error mitigation with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance.execute` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance`.  Fixes `#7129
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7129>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/expr_free_symbols_deprecation-72e4db5c178efcff.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a deprecation warning emitted when running
  :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.draw` or :func:`.circuit_drawer` with Sympy 1.9
  installed, mentioning the Sympy function ``expr_free_symbols()``.
  The circuit drawers previously made use of this method when finding
  instances of symbolic constants.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-ax-figwidth-scaling-mpl-drawer-dc480ccf82dc1007.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue where the ``ax`` kwarg and the ``figwidth`` option in the
  ``style`` kwarg for the ``mpl`` circuit drawer did not scale properly.
  Users can now pass an ``ax`` from a Matplotlib subplot to the ``mpl``
  circuit drawer and the circuit will be drawn within the boundaries of
  that subplot. Alternatively, users can set the ``figwidth`` in inches in
  the ``style`` dict kwarg and the drawing will scale to the width in
  inches that was set.
  Fixed `#6367 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6367>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-bit-failures-circuit-drawers-cc502c9cb7f90e2b.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. When displaying a ``measure``
  instruction targeted on a classical bit instead of a register, using
  the ``latex`` drawer option, the drawer would fail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-bit-failures-circuit-drawers-cc502c9cb7f90e2b.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. With any of the 3 drawer
  options, ``mpl``, ``latex``, or ``text``, if a gate with a classical
  condition was encountered that was conditioned on a classical bit
  without a register, the drawer would fail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-bit-failures-circuit-drawers-cc502c9cb7f90e2b.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. With any of the 3 drawer
  options, ``mpl``, ``latex``, or ``text``, if a gate with a classical
  condition was conditioned on the same classical bit as a ``measure``
  and the bit that the measure targeted did not have a register, the
  drawer would fail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-c3sxgate-7138e004a2b05ca8.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- :obj:`~qiskit.circuit.library.C3SXGate` now has a correct decomposition and
  matrix representation.  Previously it was equivalent to
  ``SdgXGate().control(3)``, rather than the intended ``SXGate().control(3)``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-configurable-fake-backend-6a07ca5a6159baf5.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The member ``name`` of ``qiskit.test.mock.utils.ConfigurableFakeBackend``
  has been changed to ``backend_name``. This was done to avoid a conflict with
  the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.name` method inherited from the
  parent abstract :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` class. This makes
  ``ConfigurableFakeBackend`` compatible with anything expecting a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` object. However, if you were using the
  ``name`` attribute directly before you will now need to either call it as a
  method or access the ``backend_name`` attribute instead.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-decompose-empty-gate-71455847dcaaea26.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue where calling :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.decompose()` on a
  circuit containing an :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` whose
  :attr:`~.Instruction.definition` attribute was empty would leave the
  instruction in place, instead of decomposing it into zero operations. For
  example, with a circuit::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      empty = QuantumCircuit(1, name="decompose me!")
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
      circuit.append(empty.to_gate(), [0])

  Previously, calling ``circuit.decompose()`` would not change the circuit.
  Now, the decomposition will correct decompose ``empty`` into zero
  instructions.
  See `#6997 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/6997>`__ for more.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-display-measure-condition-139ddbb8c7ae4071.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. When displaying a ``measure``
  instruction containing a classical ``condition`` using the ``mpl`` or
  ``latex`` options, the ``condition`` information would sometimes
  overwrite the ``measure`` display.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-display-measure-condition-139ddbb8c7ae4071.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. The ``mpl`` drawer used hex
  notation to display the ``condition`` value, whereas the ``text`` and
  ``latex`` drawers used decimal notation. Now all three drawers use
  hex notation.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-hoare-optimizer-0ef5ac330fc80cc4.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a bug in the Hoare optimizer transpilation pass where it could attempt
  to remove a gate twice if it could be separately combined with both its
  predecessor and its successor to form the identity.  Refer to `#7271
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7271>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-instruction-c_if-3334bc8bcc38a327.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Making an instruction conditional with the standard
  :meth:`.InstructionSet.c_if` method with integer indices is now consistent
  with the numbering scheme used by the :obj:`.QuantumCircuit` the
  instructions are part of.  Previously, if there were two
  :obj:`.ClassicalRegister`\ s with overlapping :obj:`.Clbit`\ s, the
  numbering would be incorrect.  See `#7246
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7246>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-instruction-c_if-3334bc8bcc38a327.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Making an instruction conditional with the standard
  :meth:`.InstructionSet.c_if` method will now succeed, even if there are no
  :obj:`.ClassicalRegister`\ s in the circuit.
  See `#7250 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7250>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-instruction-c_if-3334bc8bcc38a327.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Making an instruction conditional with the standard
  :meth:`.InstructionSet.c_if` method when using a :obj:`.Clbit` that is
  contained in a :obj:`.ClassicalRegister` of size one will now correctly
  create a condition on the bit, not the register.
  See `#7255 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7255>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-instruction-c_if-3334bc8bcc38a327.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Trying to make an instruction conditional with the standard
  :meth:`.InstructionSet.c_if` method will now correctly raise an error if the
  classical resource is not present in the circuit.
  See `#7255 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7255>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-matplotlib-3.5-40f6d1a109ae06fe.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a compatibility issue with Matplotlib 3.5, where the Bloch sphere
  would fail to render if it had any vectors attached, such as by using
  :obj:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_vector`.  See `#7272
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7272>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-nlocal-add_layer-c3cb0b5a49c2b04e.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :meth:`.NLocal.add_layer` method incorrectly
  appending layers if the :obj:`.NLocal` object had already been built.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-pickle-support-instmap-9f90cbcb4078f988.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with pickling :class:`~.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` object
  when using Python 3.6. See `#6944
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6944>`__ for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-pulse-parameter-formatter-c9ff103f1a7181e0.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Complex valued pulse parameter assignment with symengine has been fixed. For example,

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import circuit, pulse
    import numpy as np

    amp = circuit.Parameter("amp")
    phase = circuit.Parameter("phase")

    with pulse.build() as sched:
        pulse.play(pulse.Gaussian(160, amp * np.exp(1j * phase), 40), pulse.DriveChannel(0))
    sched.assign_parameters({amp: 0.1, phase: 1.57}, inplace=True)

  The assigned amplitude has been shown as
  ``ParameterExpression(0.1*exp(1.57*I))`` after the use of ``symengine`` was
  introduced in the 0.18.0 release.  This is now correctly evaluated and shown
  as ``7.96327e-05 + 0.0999999683j``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-qaoa-construct-da37faf75f29fc35.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue where :meth:`.QAOA.construct_circuit` with different
  operators with same number of qubits would generate the same circuit each
  time.  See `#7223 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7223>`__
  for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-qaoa-construct-da37faf75f29fc35.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue where :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QAOAAnsatz` had an
  incorrect number of parameters if identities of
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.PauliSumOp` were given, e.g.,
  ``PauliSumOp.from_list([("III", 1)])``.  See `#7225
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7225>`__ for more detail.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-qasm-invalid-names-04a935a3a14e045c.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a bug where the :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.qasm` method could
  return OpenQASM 2 instructions with invalid identifiers. The same bug was fixed
  for :obj:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate`.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-registerless-one-bit-displays-4deb8f7cecf3f602.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue where trying to display registerless bits would cause a
  failure of the ``mpl`` and the ``latex`` circuit drawers. A leading ``_``
  has been removed from the display of registerless bits' numbers in the
  ``text`` drawer.  Fixed `#6732
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6732>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-registerless-one-bit-displays-4deb8f7cecf3f602.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- For one-bit registers, all of the circuit drawers now display only
  the register name and no longer show the ``0`` subscript.
  Fixed `#5784 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5784>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-registerless-qasm-output-7a497dd8e9a0706b.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed naming collisions of implicit registers in :obj:`.QuantumCircuit.qasm`
  when dealing with registerless qubits and clbits.  Previously, registerless
  qubits and clbits were put into corresponding ``qreg`` and ``creg`` both
  called ``regless``, despite the collision.  They will now have separate,
  deterministically generated names, which will not clash with any
  user-defined register names in the circuit.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-scheduling-circuits-with-clbits-operations-e5d8bfa90e9a3ae1.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue in scheduling of circuits with clbits operations, e.g. measurements,
  conditional gates, updating
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ASAPSchedule`,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ALAPSchedule`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.AlignMeasures`.
  The updated schedulers assume all clbits I/O operations take no time,
  ``measure`` writes the measured value to a clbit at the end, and
  ``c_if`` reads the conditional value in clbit(s) at the beginning.
  Fixed `#7006 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7006>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix-transpile-empty-list-c93a41d4145a01c3.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Calling :obj:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` on an empty list will now
  correctly return an empty list without issuing a warning.  Fixed `#7287
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7287>`__.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/fix_pwchebysev_constant_fx-93e8a3d2880f68ac.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue in :obj:`.PiecewiseChebyshev` when the function to be
  approximated was constant.  In these cases, you should now pass the constant
  directly as the ``f_x`` argument, rather than using a function, such as::

      from qiskit.circuit.library.arithmetic import PiecewiseChebyshev

      PiecewiseChebyshev(1.0, degree=3)

  See `#6707 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/6707>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/hhl_qi_fix-d0ada86abaa2dba5.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- If an :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.HHL` algorithm instance was constructed
  without a :obj:`.QuantumInstance` (the default), attempts to use the getter
  and setter properties to read or set an instance later would fail. The
  getters and setters now work as expected.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/modify-copy-instruction-in-qasm-abd5c9767f2a7f38.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :meth:`.QuantumCircuit.qasm` method now edits the names of copies of the
  instructions present in the circuit, not the original instructions that live
  in ``circuit.data``.  Refer to `#6952
  <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6952>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/pauli-op-permute-fix-d244a1145093369d.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a bug in :meth:`.PauliSumOp.permute` causing the error::

      QiskitError: 'Pauli string label "" is not valid.'

  if the permutation had the same number of Pauli terms. Calling
  ``permute([2, 1, 0])`` on ``X ^ Y ^ Z`` no longer raises an error, and now
  returns ``Z ^ Y ^ X``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qaoa-parameters-49e4524ed2d3e875.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed a bug where the parameter bounds for the mixer parameters in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QAOAAnsatz` were not been set.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed determination of final operations (barriers and measures) in pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveFinalMeasurements` and in method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.remove_final_measurements`
  of class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` which previously considered
  only nodes immediately preceding an output node.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed determination of final operations in pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveFinalMeasurements` and in method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.remove_final_measurements` of class
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` which could wrongly consider a barrier
  to be final, even if other circuit operations followed it.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed multi-bit classical register removal in pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveFinalMeasurements` and in method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.remove_final_measurements` of class
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` where classical
  registers were not removed even if other bits were idle, unless a final measure
  was done into each and every bit. Now, classical registers that become idle as a
  result of removing final measurements and barriers are always removed. Classical
  bits are removed if they are referenced only by removed registers or are not
  referenced at all and became idle due to the removal. This fix also adds proper
  handling of registers with shared underlying bits.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with :obj:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveFinalMeasurements`
  which could cause the resulting :obj:`.DAGCircuit` to become invalid.  See
  `#7196 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/7196>`__ for more details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/remove-final-measure-rewrite-37d26dbba7385ebc.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.remove_final_measurements`
  of class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` that caused :attr:`.QuantumCircuit.clbits`
  to be incorrect after invocation. Refer to
  `#7089 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7089>`__ for details.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/taper_empty_operator_fix-53ce20e5d2b68fd6.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- When tapering an empty zero operator in :mod:`qiskit.opflow`, the code, on detecting it was zero, logged a
  warning and returned the original operator.  Such operators are commonly found in
  the auxiliary operators, when using Qiskit Nature, and the above behavior caused :obj:`.VQE`
  to throw an exception as tapered non-zero operators were a different number of qubits
  from the tapered zero operators (since taper has returned the input operator unchanged).
  The code will now correctly taper a zero operator such that the number of qubits is
  reduced as expected and matches to tapered non-zero operators e.g ```0*"IIII"``` when we are
  tapering by 3 qubits will become ``0*"I"``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/user-config-mpl-style-a9ae4eb7ce072fcd.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- Fixed an issue with the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function, where a custom style set via the
  user config file (i.e. ``settings.conf``) would ignore the set value of the
  ``circuit_mpl_style`` field if the ``style`` kwarg on the function/method was not
  set.


.. _Release Notes_0.19.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/full_prec_sympy-aeee8210091ef20f.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The string cast for :class:`qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` does not
  have full precision anymore. This removes the trailing 0s when printing
  parameters that are bound to floats.  This has consequences for QASM
  serialization and the circuit text drawer::

    >>> from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    >>> x = Parameter('x')
    >>> str(x.bind({x:0.5}))
    '0.5'   # instead of '0.500000000000000'

.. releasenotes/notes/0.19/qaoa-parameters-49e4524ed2d3e875.yaml @ b'd5094eeca27f2c0f3c13f23f1e812cd41b6108f2'

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QAOAAnsatz` has been updated to use the parameter
  symbol ```` for the cost operator and ```` for the mixer operator, as is the standard
  notation in QAOA literature.

Aer 0.9.1
=========

No change


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.0:

Ignis 0.7.0
===========

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/deprecate-ignis-def3e398d9d86ac5.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

This release deprecates the Qiskit Ignis project, it has been supersceded by the
`Qiskit Experiments <https://qiskit.org/documentation/experiments/>`__ project and active
development has ceased. While deprecated, critical bug fixes and compatibility fixes will
continue to be made to provide users a sufficient opportunity to migrate off of Ignis. After the
deprecation period (which will be no shorter than 3 months from this release) the project will be
retired and archived.

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/accreditation-rework-193c331d6f85dc57.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- Updated the accreditation protocol to use fitting routine from
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06603.
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.accreditation.AccreditationFitter`
  now has methods FullAccreditation (previous protocol) and MeanAccreditation
  (new protocol).  In addtition data entry has been changed to either
  use the result object AppendResult or a list of strings AppendStrings.
  :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QOTPCorrectString` was also added.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/analytical-syndrome-graph-1cbc0a900c987ad8.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- Added the option for the fast analytical generation of syndrome graphs.
  The :class:`.RepetitionCode` now has a new bool argument ``brute``, which
  allows to still use the brute force method.
  Helper class :class:`.RepetitionCodeSyndromeGenerator` added to
  facilitate this.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/optional-resets-and-delays-2cd301f1257b3962.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- The :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.RepetitionCode` now has keyword
  arguments ``resets`` and ``delay``. The former determines whether reset
  gates are inserted after measurement. The latter allows a time (in dt) to
  be specificed for a delay after each measurement (and reset, if applicable).

  The :meth:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.RepitionCode.syndrome_measurement` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.RepetitionCode` now has keyword
  arguments ``final`` and ``delay``. The former determines whether to add reset gates according
  to the global ``resets``, or to overwrite it with appropriate behavior for the
  final round of syndrome measurements. The latter allows a time (in dt) to be specificed
  for a delay after each measurement (and reset, if applicable).

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/xbasis-encoding-e9d008b027b5d7d9.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- The :class:`.RepetitionCode` class now supports encoding with x basis
  states. This can be used by setting the ``xbasis`` keyword argument when
  constructing a :class:`.RepetitionCode` object.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/optional-resets-and-delays-2cd301f1257b3962.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- The keyword argument ``reset`` has been removed from the
  the :meth:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.RepitionCode.syndrome_measurement`
  method of :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.RepetitionCode`. This is
  replaced by the global ``resets`` keyword argument for the class as well as
  the keyword argument ``final`` for ``syndrome_measurement``. In cases where
  one would previously add the final measurement round using ``reset=False``
  to avoid the final reset gates, one should now use ``final=True``.

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/remove-parametrized-schedule-dependency-71f43e478d9a4080.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- Remove ``ParametrizedSchedule`` from
  :py:func:`~qiskit.ignis.characterization.calibrations.ibmq_utils.update_u_gates`.

  ``ParametrizedSchedule`` was deprecated as a part of Qiskit-terra 0.17.0 and will be
  removed in next release. The function now updates u gates with ``Schedule`` programs
  involving unassigned ``Parameter`` objects.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.7.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/accreditation-rework-193c331d6f85dc57.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- Deprecating methods in
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.accreditation.AccreditationFitter`
  namely bound_variation_distance and single_protocol_run

.. releasenotes/notes/0.7/deprecate-ignis-def3e398d9d86ac5.yaml @ b'4c45654256ce8fecb60cb1d9d5ff481d6efd3428'

- The Qiskit Ignis project as a whole has been deprecated and the project
  will be retired and archived in the future. While deprecated only
  compatibility fixes and fixes for critical bugs will be made to the proejct.
  Instead of using Qiskit Ignis you should migrate to use
  `Qiskit Experiments <https://qiskit.org/documentation/experiments/>`__
  instead. You can refer to the migration guide:

  https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis#migration-guide


*************
Qiskit 0.32.1
*************

Terra 0.18.3
============

No change

Aer 0.9.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.18.1
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes `#209 <https://github.com/Qiskit-Partners/qiskit-ibm/issues/209>`__ where the websocket
  connection kept timing out when streaming results for a runtime job, due to inactivity,
  when the job is in a pending state for a long time.

*************
Qiskit 0.32.0
*************

Terra 0.18.3
============

No change

Aer 0.9.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.18.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_IBMQ_New Features:

New Features
------------

- You can now pass ``program_id`` parameter to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.jobs`
  method to filter jobs by Program ID.

- You can view the last updated date of a runtime program using
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeProgram.update_date` property.

- If you are the author of a runtime program,
  you can now use :attr:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeProgram.data`
  property to retrieve the program data as a string.

- You can now use the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.update_program`
  method to update the metadata for a Qiskit Runtime program.
  Program metadata can be specified using the ``metadata`` parameter or
  individual parameters, such as ``name`` and ``description``. If the
  same metadata field is specified in both places, the individual parameter
  takes precedence.

- You can now use the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.update_program`
  method to update the data of an existing runtime program.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_IBMQ_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Runtime programs will no longer have a ``version`` field.

- By default, :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.pprint_programs()`
  now only prints the summary of each runtime program instead of all of the details.
  There is a new parameter ``detailed`` that can be set to ``True`` to print all details.

- ``limit`` and ``skip`` parameters have been added to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.programs` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.pprint_programs`.
  ``limit`` can be used to set the number of runtime programs returned
  and ``skip`` is the number of programs to skip when retrieving
  programs.

- The `data` parameter to :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.upload_program`
  can now only be of type string. It can be either the program data,
  or path to the file that contains program data.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.upload_program` now takes only two
  parameters, ``data``, which is the program passed as a string or the path to the program
  file and the ``metadata``, which is passed as a dictionary or path to the metadata JSON file.
  In ``metadata`` the ``backend_requirements``, ``parameters``, ``return_values`` and
  ``interim_results`` are now grouped under a specifications ``spec`` section.
  ``parameters``, ``return_values`` and ``interim_results`` should now be specified as
  JSON Schema.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.run_circuits` method now takes a `backend_name`
  parameter, which is a string, instead of `backend`, which is a ``Backend`` object.

- The default number of ``shots`` (represents the number of repetitions of each circuit,
  for sampling) in :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run`, has been increased from
  1024 to 4000.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue wherein a runtime job result cannot be retrieved multiple
  times if the result contains a numpy array.

*************
Qiskit 0.31.0
*************

Terra 0.18.3
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.9.1_Aer:

Aer 0.9.1
=========

.. _Release Notes_0.9.1_Aer_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- ``optimize_ideal_threshold`` and ``optimize_noisy_threshold`` have been
  removed from the lists of simulator defaults and the documentation.
  These have had no effect since Aer 0.5.1, but these references to them
  had remained accidentally.

.. _Release Notes_0.9.1_Aer_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes `#1351 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issue/1351>`__
  where running an empty :obj:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with
  a noise model set would cause the simulator to crash.

- Fixes `#1347 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issue/1347>`__
  where the behaviour of using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.set_options` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.set_option` methods of
  simulator backends could lead to different behavior for some options.

- Fixes an bug where using a Dask Client executor would cause an error at
  job submission due to the executor Client not being pickleable.

- Fixed an issue with the `matrix_product_state` simulation method where
  the accumulation of small rounding errors during measurement of many
  quits could sometimes cause a segmentation fault.

- Fixes an unintended change between qiskit-aer 0.8.0 and 0.9.0 where when
  running a list of circuits with an invalid circuit using the ``automatic``
  simulation method of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` or
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` would raise an exception
  for an invalid input qobj rather than return partial results for the
  circuits that were valid.

- Fixes an issue with the standalone simulator where it would return a
  `IBM Quantum API schema <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas>`__
  invalid response in the case of an error that prevented the simulation from running.

- Fixes `#1346 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issue/1346>`__
  which was a bug in the handling of the ``parameter_binds`` kwarg of
  the backend :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.run` method that
  would result in an error if the parameterized circuit was transpiled to
  a different set of basis gates than the original parameterizations.

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_IBMQ:

IBM Q Provider 0.17.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_IBMQ_New Features:

New Features
------------

- A runtime program's visibility can now be specified on upload
  using ``is_public`` parameter in
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.upload_program`.

- You can now specify a parent experiment ID when creating an experiment
  with :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService.create_experiment`.
  Experiments can also be filtered by their parent experiment ID in
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService.experiments`.

- Runtime image can now be specified using the `image` parameter in
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.run`.
  Note that not all accounts are authorized to select a different image.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_IBMQ_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeEncoder` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeDecoder`
  are updated to support Python ``datetime``, which is not
  JSON serializable by default.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_IBMQ_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue where
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager.retrieve_job_set` only
  retrieves the first 10 jobs in a :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.ManagedJobSet`.

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeDecoder` can now restore dictionary integer keys
  in optimizer settings from a JSON string representation dumped by the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeEncoder`.

*************
Qiskit 0.30.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.18.3:

Terra 0.18.3
============

Prelude
-------

This bugfix release fixes a few minor issues in 0.18, including a performance
regression in :obj:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` when dealing with executing
:class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects on pulse-enabled backends.

.. _Release Notes_0.18.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed `#7004 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/7004>`__ where
  ``AttributeError`` was raised when executing
  :obj:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock` on a pulse backend. These blocks are now
  correctly treated as pulse jobs, like :obj:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`.

- Fixed an issue causing an error when binding a complex parameter value to an operator's
  coefficient. Casts to ``float`` in :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PrimitiveOp`
  were generalized to casts to ``complex`` if necessary, but will remain ``float`` if
  there is no imaginary component.
  Fixes `#6976 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6976>`__.

- Update the 1-qubit gate errors in
  :obj:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_error_map` to use the `sx` gate instead of
  the `u2` gate, consistent with IBMQ backends.

Aer 0.9.0
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.16.0
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.30.0
*************

Terra 0.18.2
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0:

Aer 0.9.0
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.9 release includes new backend options for parallel exeuction
of large numbers of circuits on a HPC cluster using a Dask distributed,
along with other general performance improvements and bug fixes.


.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Aer_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Added support for set_matrix_product_state.

- Add qiskit library :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXdgGate`
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CUGate` to the supported basis gates for
  the Aer simulator backends. Note that the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CUGate`
  gate is only natively
  supported for the ``statevector`` and ``unitary`` methods. For other simulation
  methods it must be transpiled to the supported basis gates for that method.

- Adds support for N-qubit Pauli gate (
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.generalized_gates.PauliGate`) to all
  simulation methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds the ability to set a custom executor and configure job splitting for
  executing multiple circuits in parallel on a HPC clustor. A custom
  executor can be set using the ``executor`` option, and job splitting is
  configured by using the ``max_job_size`` option.

  For example configuring a backend and executing using

  .. code-block:: python

     backend = AerSimulator(max_job_size=1, executor=custom_executor)
     job = backend.run(circuits)

  will split the exection into multiple jobs each containing a single
  circuit. If job splitting is enabled the ``run`` method will return a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.jobs.AerJobSet` object containing all the
  individual :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.jobs.AerJob` classes. After all
  individual jobs finish running the job results are automatically combined
  into a single Result object that is returned by ``job.result()``.

  Supported executors include those in the Python ``concurrent.futures``
  `module <https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html>`__
  (eg. ``ThreadPoolExecutor``, ``ProcessPoolExecutor``), and
  `Dask <http://dask.org>`__ distributed  Client executors if the optional
  dask library is installed. Using a Dask executor allows configuring parallel
  execution of multiple circuits on HPC clusters. See the
  Dask executor :ref:`API Documentation <dask>` for additional details
  on using Dask executors for HPC simulation.

- Adds ability to record logging data for the ``matrix_product_state``
  simulation method to the experiment result metadata by setting the
  backend option  ``mps_log_data=True``. The saved data includes the
  bond dimensions and the discarded value (the sum of the squares of
  the Schmidt coeffients that were discarded by approximation) after
  every relevant circuit instruction.

- The :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.run` method for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` has a new kwarg,
  ``parameter_binds`` which is used to provide a list of values to use for
  any unbound parameters in the inbound circuit. For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Parameter
    from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator

    shots = 1000
    backend = AerSimulator()
    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    theta = Parameter('theta')
    circuit.rx(theta, 0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()
    parameter_binds = [{theta: [0, 3.14, 6.28]}]
    backend.run(circuit, shots=shots, parameter_binds=parameter_binds).result()

  will run the input circuit 3 times with the values 0, 3.14, and 6.28 for
  theta. When running with multiple parameters the length of the value lists
  must all be the same. When running with multiple circuits, the length
  of ``parameter_binds`` must match the number of input circuits (you can use
  an empty dict, ``{}``, if there are no binds for a circuit).

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.backends.PulseSimulator` can now take
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects on the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.backends.PulseSimulator.run`. Previously,
  it only would except :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` objects as input to
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.backends.PulseSimulator.run`. When a circuit
  or list of circuits is passed to the simulator it will call
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.schedule` to convert the circuits to a schedule
  before executing the circuit. For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.compiler import transpile
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeVigo
    from qiskit.providers.aer.backends import PulseSimulator

    backend = PulseSimulator.from_backend(FakeVigo())

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()

    transpiled_circuit = transpile(circuit, backend)
    backend.run(circuit)


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValue` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValueVariance` have
  been disabled for the `extended_stabilizer` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` due to returning the
  incorrect value for certain Pauli operator components. Refer to
  `#1227 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1227>` for more
  information and examples.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The default basis for the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel`
  class has been changed from ``["id", "u3", "cx"]`` to
  ``["id", "rz", "sx", "cx"]`` due to the deprecation of the ``u3`` circuit
  method in qiskit-terra and change of qiskit-ibmq-provider backend basis
  gates. To use the old basis gates you can initialize a noise model with
  custom basis gates as ``NoiseModel(basis_gates=["id", "u3", "cx"])``.

- Removed the ``backend_options`` kwarg from the ``run`` methnod of Aer backends
  that was deprecated in qiskit-aer 0.7. All run options must now be passed as
  separate kwargs.

- Removed passing ``system_model`` as a positional arg for the ``run`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator`.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Passing an assembled qobj directly to the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.run` method of the Aer simulator
  backends has been deprecated in favor of passing transpiled circuits
  directly as ``backend.run(circuits, **run_options)``.

- All snapshot instructions in :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions` have
  been deprecated. For replacement use the save instructions from the
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.library` module.

- Adding non-local quantum errors to a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel` has been deprecated due to
  inconsistencies in how this noise is applied to the optimized circuit.
  Non-local noise should be manually added to a scheduled circuit in Qiskit
  using a custom transpiler pass before being run on the simulator.

- Use of the ``method`` option of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` to run a GPU simulation
  has been deprecated. To run a GPU simulation on a compatible system
  use the option ``device='GPU'`` instead.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes performance issue with how the ``basis_gates`` configuration
  attribute was set. Previously there were unintended side-effects to the
  backend class which could cause repeated simulation runtime to
  incrementally increase. Refer to
  `#1229 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1229>` for more
  information and examples.

- Fixed bug in MPS::apply_kraus. After applying the kraus matrix to the relevant
  qubits, we should propagate the changes to the neighboring qubits.

- Fixes a bug where qiskit-terra assumes that qubits in a multiplexer gate
  are first the targets and then the controls of the gate while qiskit-aer
  assumes the opposite order.

- Fixes a bug introduced in 0.8.0 where GPU simulations would allocate
  unneeded host memory in addition to the GPU memory.

- Fixes bug where the initialize instruction would disable measurement
  sampling optimization for the statevector and matrix product state
  simulation methods even when it was the first circuit instruction or
  applied to all qubits and hence deterministic.

- Fix issue #1196 by using the inner products with the computational basis
  states to calculate the norm rather than the norm estimation algorithm.

- Fixes a bug in the ``stabilizer`` simulator method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` where the expectation value
  for the ``save_expectation_value`` and ``snapshot_expectation_value``
  could have the wrong sign for certain ``Y`` Pauli's.

- Fixes bug where the if the required memory is smaller than the system memory the
  multi-chunk simulation method was enabled and simulation was still started.
  This case will now throw an insufficient memory exception.

- Fixes issue where setting the ``shots`` option for a backend with
  ``set_options(shots=k)`` was always running the default number of shots (1024)
  rather than the specified value.

- Fixes a bug in how the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` handled the
  option value for ``max_parallel_experiments=1``. Previously this was treated
  the same as ``max_parallel_experiments=0``.

- Fixes bug in the ``extended_stabilizer`` simulation method where it
  incorrectly treated qelay gate and multi-qubit Pauli instructions as
  unsupported.

- Fixes typo in the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` options for the
  ``extended_stabilizer_norm_estimation_repetitions`` option.

- Fixes bug with applying the ``unitary`` gate in using the ``matrix_product_state``
  simulation method which did not correctly support permutations in the ordering of
  the qubits on which the gate is applied.

- Fixes an issue where gate fusion could still be enabled for the
  ``matrix_product_state`` simulation method even though it is not supported.
  Now fusion is always disabled for this method.

- Fixed bug in the ``matrix_product_state`` simulation method in computing the
  normalization following truncation of the  Schmidt coefficients after
  performing the SVD.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.9.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- Improves the performance of the measurement sampling algorithm for the
  ``matrix_product_state`` simulation method.
  The new default behaviour is to always sample using the
  improved ``mps_apply_measure`` method. The ``mps_probabilities`` sampling
  method be still used by setting the custom option value
  ``mps_sample_measure_algorithm="mps_probabilities"``.

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.16.0
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.29.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.18.2:

Terra 0.18.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.18.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` function when
  called with the ``backend`` kwarg set and the ``parametric_pulses`` kwarg
  was set to an empty list the output qobj would contain the
  ``parametric_pulses`` setting from the given backend's
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration` instead of the
  expected empty list.
  Fixed `#6898 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6898>`__

- The Matplotlib circuit drawer will no longer duplicate drawings when using
  ``ipykernel>=6.0.0``.
  Fixes `#6889 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6889>`__.

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.9.5:

Aqua 0.9.5
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.9.5_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed a handling error in the Yahoo provider when only one ticker is entered.
  Added exception error if no ticker is entered.
  Limit yfinance to >=0.1.62 as previous versions have a JSON decoder error.

IBM Q Provider 0.16.0
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.29.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1:

Terra 0.18.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This bugfix release fixes a few minor issues and regressions in the 0.18.0
release.  There is also a minor change to how ``pip`` handles the ``[all]``
extra when installing ``qiskit-terra`` directly, compared to 0.18.0.

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- ``pip install qiskit-terra[all]`` will no longer attempt to install the
  ``bip-mapper`` extra.  This is because the dependency ``cplex`` is not well
  supported on the range of Python versions and OSes that Terra supports, and
  a failed extra dependency would fail the entire package resolution.  If you
  are using Python 3.7 or 3.8 and are on Linux-x64 or -ppc64le, macOS-x64 or
  Windows-x64 you should be able to install ``qiskit-terra[bip-mapper]``
  explicitly, if desired, while other combinations of OS, platform
  architectures and Python versions will likely fail.

.. _Release Notes_0.18.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue where the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class would potentially
  try to use the :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.CompleteMeasFitter` class
  before it was imported resulting in an error.
  Fixed `#6774 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6774>`__

- Fixed the missing Linux aarch64 wheels which were not published for the
  0.18.0 release. They should now continue to be built as expected for all
  future releases.

- Fixed an issue with the mock backends located in ``qiskit.test.mock`` where
  in some situations (mainly fake backends with stored
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties` running a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with ``qiskit-aer`` installed)
  passing run time options to the ``run()`` method of a fake backend object
  would not actually be passed to the simulator underlying the ``run()``
  method and not have any effect.
  Fixed `#6741 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6741>`__

- Fix a bug in :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.EvolvedOperatorAnsatz` when the
  global phase is 0 (such as for :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QAOAAnsatz`) but
  was still a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression`.

- Fixed an issue with the :attr:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA.settings`
  attribute of :obj:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA`, which was missing
  the ``fidelity`` argument from the output.  This is now correctly included
  in the attribute's output.

- Fixed an issue with the :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.subgraph`
  method of the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` class where it would
  incorrectly add nodes to the output :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap`
  object when the ``nodelist`` argument contained a non-contiguous list
  of qubit indices. This has been fixed so regardless of the input
  indices in ``nodelist`` the output
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` will only contained the specified
  nodes reindexed starting at 0.
  Fixes `#6736 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6736>`__

- Previously, :obj:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`
  failed to properly optimize one qubit gates that are sufficiently close to
  the identity matrix. This was fixed so that any gates that differ from the
  identity by less than 1e-15 are removed.

- Fixed the generation and loading of QPY files with
  :func:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization.dump` and
  :func:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization.load` for
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects that contain instructions
  with classical conditions on a single :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit` instead
  of a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister`. While the use of single
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit` conditions is not yet fully supported, if you
  were using them in a circuit they are now correctly serialized by QPY.

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.4
==========

No change

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.16.0:

IBM Q Provider 0.16.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.16.0_New Features:

New Features
------------
- A user can now set and retrieve preferences for
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService`.
  Preferences are saved on disk in the ``$HOME/.qiskit/qiskitrc`` file.
  Currently the only preference option is ``auto_save``, which tells
  applications that use this service, such as `qiskit-experiments`,
  whether you want changes to be automatically saved.
  Usage examples::

    provider.experiment.save_preferences(auto_save=True) # set and save preferences
    provider.experiment.preferences                      # return all saved preferences

- The methods
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService.create_figure`
  and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService.update_figure`
  now accept the ``sync_upload`` keyword. This controls whether or not the figure
  will be uploaded asynchronously or synchronously to backend storage. By default
  ``sync_upload`` is ``True`` for synchronous upload.

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.16.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------
- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.IBMExperimentService` is
  updated to work with the new ``qiskit-experiments``. As a result,
  the syntax of the experiment service is drastically changed. This change,
  however, takes the experiment service out of beta mode, and future changes
  will provide backward compatibility according to Qiskit deprecation policy.
- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.utils.RuntimeEncoder` now convert a
  callable object to ``None``, since callables are not JSON serializable.
- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` no longer
  accepts `validate_qobj` as a parameter.
  If you were relying on this schema validation you should pull the schemas
  from the `Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas>`_
  and directly validate your payloads with that.

*************
Qiskit 0.28.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.18.0:

Terra 0.18.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release includes many new features and bug fixes. The highlights of
this release are the introduction of two new transpiler
passes, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BIPMapping` and
:class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DynamicalDecoupling`, which when combined
with the new ``pulse_optimize`` kwarg on the
:class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis` pass enables recreating
the Quantum Volume 64 results using the techniques
described in: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08571. These new transpiler passes
and options and are also generally applicable to optimizing any circuit.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The ``measurement_error_mitgation`` kwarg for the
  :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` constructor can now be set to the
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter` class from
  qiskit-ignis in addition to
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.CompleteMeasFitter` that was already
  supported. If you use :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter`
  you will also be able to set the new ``mit_pattern`` kwarg to specify the
  qubits on which to use :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter`
  You can refer to the documentation for ``mit_pattern`` in the
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredMeasFitter` documentation for
  the expected format.

- The decomposition methods for single-qubit gates, specified via the
  ``basis`` kwarg, in
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` has been expanded to
  now also include the ``'ZSXX'`` basis, for making use of direct
  :math:`X` gate as well as :math:`\sqrt{X}` gate.

- Added two new passes :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.AlignMeasures` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ValidatePulseGates` to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. These passes are a hardware-aware
  optimization, and a validation routine that are used to manage alignment
  restrictions on time allocation of instructions for a backend.

  If a backend has a restriction on the alignment of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Measure` instructions (in terms of quantization in time), the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.AlignMeasures` pass is used to adjust
  delays in a scheduled circuit to ensure that any
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Measure` instructions in the circuit
  are aligned given the constraints of the backend. The
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ValidatePulseGates` pass is used to
  check if any custom pulse gates (gates that have a custom pulse definition
  in the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.calibrations` attribute of
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object) are valid given
  an alignment constraint for the target backend.

  In the built-in :mod:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmangers` used by the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function, these passes get automatically
  triggered if the alignment constraint, either via the dedicated
  ``timing_constraints`` kwarg on :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` or has an
  ``timing_constraints`` attribute in the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration` object of the
  backend being targetted.

  The backends from IBM Quantum Services (accessible via the
  `qiskit-ibmq-provider <https://pypi.org/project/qiskit-ibmq-provider/>`__
  package) will provide the alignment information in the near future.

   For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import circuit, transpile
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeArmonk

    backend = FakeArmonk()

    qc = circuit.QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
    qc.x(0)
    qc.delay(110, 0, unit="dt")
    qc.measure(0, 0)
    qc.draw('mpl')

  .. jupyter-execute::

    qct = transpile(qc, backend, scheduling_method='alap',
                    timing_constraints={'acquire_alignment': 16})
    qct.draw('mpl')

- A new transpiler pass class :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.BIPMapping`
  that tries to find the best layout and routing at once by solving a BIP
  (binary integer programming) problem as described in
  `arXiv:2106.06446 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.06446>`__ has been added.

  The ``BIPMapping`` pass (named "mapping" to refer to "layout and routing")
  represents the mapping problem as a BIP (binary integer programming)
  problem and relies on CPLEX (``cplex``) to solve the BIP problem.
  The dependent libraries including CPLEX can be installed along with qiskit-terra:

  .. code-block::

    pip install qiskit-terra[bip-mapper]

  Since the free version of CPLEX can solve only small BIP problems, i.e. mapping
  of circuits with less than about 5 qubits, the paid version of CPLEX may be
  needed to map larger circuits.

  The BIP mapper scales badly with respect to the number of qubits or gates.
  For example, it would not work with ``coupling_map`` beyond 10 qubits because
  the BIP solver (CPLEX) could not find any solution within the default time limit.

  Note that, if you want to fix physical qubits to be used in the mapping
  (e.g. running Quantum Volume (QV) circuits), you need to specify ``coupling_map``
  which contains only the qubits to be used.

  Here is a minimal example code to build pass manager to transpile a QV circuit:

  .. code-block:: python

    num_qubits = 4  # QV16
    circ = QuantumVolume(num_qubits=num_qubits)

    backend = ...
    basis_gates = backend.configuration().basis_gates
    coupling_map = CouplingMap.from_line(num_qubits)  # supply your own coupling map

    def _not_mapped(property_set):
        return not property_set["is_swap_mapped"]

    def _opt_control(property_set):
        return not property_set["depth_fixed_point"]

    from qiskit.circuit.equivalence_library import SessionEquivalenceLibrary as sel
    pm = PassManager()
    # preparation
    pm.append([
        Unroll3qOrMore(),
        TrivialLayout(coupling_map),
        FullAncillaAllocation(coupling_map),
        EnlargeWithAncilla(),
        BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements()
    ])
    # mapping
    pm.append(BIPMapping(coupling_map))
    pm.append(CheckMap(coupling_map))
    pm.append(Error(msg="BIP mapper failed to map", action="raise"),
              condition=_not_mapped)
    # post optimization
    pm.append([
        Depth(),
        FixedPoint("depth"),
        Collect2qBlocks(),
        ConsolidateBlocks(basis_gates=basis_gates),
        UnitarySynthesis(basis_gates),
        Optimize1qGatesDecomposition(basis_gates),
        CommutativeCancellation(),
        UnrollCustomDefinitions(sel, basis_gates),
        BasisTranslator(sel, basis_gates)
    ], do_while=_opt_control)

    transpile_circ = pm.run(circ)

- A new constructor method
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule.initialize_from` was added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` and :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`
  classes. This method initializes a new empty schedule which
  takes the attributes from other schedule. For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      sched = Schedule(name='my_sched')
      new_sched = Schedule.initialize_from(sched)

      assert sched.name == new_sched.name

- A new kwarg, ``line_discipline``, has been added to the :func:`~qiskit.tools.job_monitor`
  function. This kwarg enables changing the carriage return characters used in the
  ``job_monitor`` output. The ``line_discipline`` kwarg defaults to ``'\r'``, which is what was
  in use before.

- The abstract ``Pulse`` class (which is the parent class for classes such
  as :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Waveform`,
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Constant`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Gaussian` now has a new kwarg on the
  constructor, ``limit_amplitude``, which can be set to ``False`` to disable
  the previously hard coded amplitude limit of ``1``. This can also be set as
  a class attribute directly to change the global default for a Pulse class.
  For example::

    from qiskit.pulse.library import Waveform

    # Change the default value of limit_amplitude to False
    Waveform.limit_amplitude = False
    wave = Waveform(2.0 * np.exp(1j * 2 * np.pi * np.linspace(0, 1, 1000)))


- A new class, :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliList`, has been added to
  the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. This class is used to
  efficiently represent a list of :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli`
  operators. This new class inherets from the same parent class as the
  existing :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` (and therefore can be
  mostly used interchangeably), however it differs from the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`
  because the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliList` class
  can handle Z4 phases.

- Added a new transpiler pass, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveBarriers`,
  to :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes`. This pass is used to remove all barriers in a
  circuit.

- Add a new optimizer class,
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SciPyOptimizer`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers` module. This class is a simple wrapper class
  of the ``scipy.optimize.minimize`` function
  (`documentation <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.minimize.html>`__)
  which enables the use of all optimization solvers and all
  parameters (e.g. callback) which are supported by ``scipy.optimize.minimize``.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import SciPyOptimizer

      values = []

      def callback(x):
          values.append(x)

      optimizer = SciPyOptimizer("BFGS", options={"maxiter": 1000}, callback=callback)

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.HoareOptimizer` pass has been
  improved so that it can now replace a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` in a circuit with
  with the base gate if all the control qubits are in the
  :math:`|1\rangle` state.

- Added two new methods, :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.is_successor` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.is_predecessor`, to the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class. These functions are used to check if a node
  is either a successor or predecessor of another node on the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`.

- A new transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho`, was added
  to the :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. This pass is similar
  to the existing :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilder`
  in that it creates calibrations for an ``RZXGate(theta)``,
  however :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho`
  does this without inserting the echo pulses in the pulse schedule. This
  enables exposing the echo in the cross-resonance sequence as gates so that
  the transpiler can simplify them. The
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilderNoEcho` pass only
  supports the hardware-native direction of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate`.

- A new kwarg, ``wrap``, has been added to the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. This enables choosing whether
  composed circuits should be wrapped into an instruction or not. By
  default this is ``False``, i.e. no wrapping. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.h([0, 1])
      other = QuantumCircuit(2)
      other.x([0, 1])
      print(circuit.compose(other, wrap=True))  # wrapped
      print(circuit.compose(other, wrap=False))  # not wrapped

- A new attribute,
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.control_channels`,
  has been added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` class. This
  attribute represents the control channels on a backend as a mapping of
  qubits to a list of :class:`~qiskit.pulse.channels.ControlChannel` objects.

- A new kwarg, ``epsilon``, has been added to the constructor for the
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Isometry` class and the corresponding
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.isometry`. This kwarg enables
  optionally setting the epsilon tolerance used by an
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Isometry` gate. For example::

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit import QuantumRegister, QuantumCircuit

      tolerance = 1e-8
      iso = np.eye(2,2)
      num_q_output = int(np.log2(iso.shape[0]))
      num_q_input = int(np.log2(iso.shape[1]))
      q = QuantumRegister(num_q_output)
      qc = QuantumCircuit(q)

      qc.isometry(iso, q[:num_q_input], q[num_q_input:], epsilon=tolerance)

- Added a transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DynamicalDecoupling`, to
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` for inserting dynamical decoupling sequences
  in idle periods of a circuit (after mapping to physical qubits and
  scheduling). The pass allows control over the sequence of DD gates, the
  spacing between them, and the qubits to apply on. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library import XGate
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, InstructionDurations
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ALAPSchedule, DynamicalDecoupling
      from qiskit.visualization import timeline_drawer

      circ = QuantumCircuit(4)
      circ.h(0)
      circ.cx(0, 1)
      circ.cx(1, 2)
      circ.cx(2, 3)
      circ.measure_all()

      durations = InstructionDurations(
          [("h", 0, 50), ("cx", [0, 1], 700), ("reset", None, 10),
           ("cx", [1, 2], 200), ("cx", [2, 3], 300),
           ("x", None, 50), ("measure", None, 1000)]
      )

      dd_sequence = [XGate(), XGate()]

      pm = PassManager([ALAPSchedule(durations),
                        DynamicalDecoupling(durations, dd_sequence)])
      circ_dd = pm.run(circ)
      timeline_drawer(circ_dd)

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` has a new kwarg, ``encoding``,
  which can be used to optionally set the character encoding of an output QASM
  file generated by the function. This can be set to any valid codec or alias
  string from the Python standard library's
  `codec module <https://docs.python.org/3/library/codecs.html#standard-encodings>`__.

- Added a new class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.EvolvedOperatorAnsatz`,
  to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module. This library circuit, which
  had previously been located in
  `Qiskit Nature <https://qiskit.org/documentation/nature/>`__ , can be used
  to construct ansatz circuits that consist of time-evolved operators, where
  the evolution time is a variational parameter. Examples of such ansatz
  circuits include ``UCCSD`` class in the ``chemistry`` module of
  Qiskit Nature or the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QAOAAnsatz` class.

- A new fake backend class is available under ``qiskit.test.mock`` for the
  ``ibmq_guadalupe`` backend.  As with the other fake backends, this includes
  a snapshot of calibration data (i.e. ``backend.defaults()``) and error data
  (i.e. ``backend.properties()``) taken from the real system, and can be used
  for local testing, compilation and simulation.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule.children` for the
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` class has been added. This method is used
  to return the child schedule components of the
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` object as a tuple. It returns nested
  schedules without flattening. This method is equivalent to the private
  ``_children()`` method but has a public and stable interface.

- A new optimizer class,
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.GradientDescent`, has been added
  to the :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers` module. This optimizer class
  implements a standard gradient descent optimization algorithm for use
  with quantum variational algorithms, such as
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE`.
  For a detailed description and examples on how to use this class, please
  refer to the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.GradientDescent` class
  documentation.

- A new optimizer class, :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA`,
  has been added to the :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers` module. This
  class implements the
  `Quantum Natural SPSA (QN-SPSA) <https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.09232>`__
  algorithm, a generalization of the 2-SPSA algorithm, and estimates the
  Quantum Fisher Information Matrix instead of the Hessian to obtain a
  stochastic estimate of the Quantum Natural Gradient. For examples on
  how to use this new optimizer refer to the
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.QNSPSA` class documentation.

- A new kwarg, ``second_order``, has been added to the constructor
  of the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers` module. When set to ``True`` this
  enables using
  `second-order SPSA <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/657661>`__.
  Second order SPSA, or 2-SPSA, is an extension of the ordinary SPSA algorithm that
  enables estimating the Hessian alongside the gradient, which is used
  to precondition the gradient before the parameter update step. As a
  second-order method, this tries to improve convergence of SPSA.
  For examples on how to use this option refer to the
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` class documentation.

- When using the ``latex`` or ``latex_source`` output mode of
  :meth:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` or the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` the ``style`` kwarg
  can now be used just as with the ``mpl`` output formatting.
  However, unlike the ``mpl`` output mode only the ``displaytext``
  field will be used when using the ``latex`` or ``latex_source`` output
  modes (because neither supports color).

- When using the ``mpl`` or ``latex`` output methods for the
  :meth:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function or the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`, you can now use math mode
  formatting for text and set color formatting (``mpl`` only)
  by setting the ``style`` kwarg as a dict
  with a user-generated name or label. For example, to add subscripts and to
  change a gate color:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library import HGate
      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      qc.append(HGate(label='h1'), [0])
      qc.append(HGate(label='h2'), [1])
      qc.append(HGate(label='h3'), [2])
      qc.draw('mpl', style={'displaytext': {'h1': 'H_1', 'h2': 'H_2', 'h3': 'H_3'},
          'displaycolor': {'h2': ('#EEDD00', '#FF0000')}})

- Added three new classes,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CDKMRippleCarryAdder`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ClassicalAdder` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.DraperQFTAdder`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module. These new circuit classes are used to
  perform classical addition of two equally-sized qubit registers. For two
  registers :math:`|a\rangle_n` and :math:`|b\rangle_n` on :math:`n`
  qubits, the three new classes perform the operation:

  .. math::

    |a\rangle_n |b\rangle_n \mapsto |a\rangle_n |a + b\rangle_{n + 1}.

  For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit.library import CDKMRippleCarryAdder
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    # a encodes |01> = 1
    a = QuantumCircuit(2)
    a.x(0)

    # b encodes |10> = 2
    b = QuantumCircuit(2)
    b.x(1)

    # adder on 2-bit numbers
    adder = CDKMRippleCarryAdder(2)

    # add the state preparations to the front of the circuit
    adder.compose(a, [0, 1], inplace=True, front=True)
    adder.compose(b, [2, 3], inplace=True, front=True)

    # simulate and get the state of all qubits
    sv = Statevector(adder)
    counts = sv.probabilities_dict()
    state = list(counts.keys())[0]  # we only have a single state

    # skip the input carry (first bit) and the register |a> (last two bits)
    result = state[1:-2]
    print(result)  # '011' = 3 = 1 + 2

- Added two new classes,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RGQFTMultiplier` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.HRSCumulativeMultiplier`, to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module. These classes are used to perform
  classical multiplication of two equally-sized qubit registers. For two
  registers :math:`|a\rangle_n` and :math:`|b\rangle_n` on :math:`n`
  qubits, the two new classes perform the operation

  .. math::

    |a\rangle_n |b\rangle_n |0\rangle_{2n} \mapsto |a\rangle_n |b\rangle_n |a \cdot b\rangle_{2n}.

  For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit.library import RGQFTMultiplier
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    num_state_qubits = 2

    # a encodes |11> = 3
    a = QuantumCircuit(num_state_qubits)
    a.x(range(num_state_qubits))

    # b encodes |11> = 3
    b = QuantumCircuit(num_state_qubits)
    b.x(range(num_state_qubits))

    # multiplier on 2-bit numbers
    multiplier = RGQFTMultiplier(num_state_qubits)

    # add the state preparations to the front of the circuit
    multiplier.compose(a, [0, 1], inplace=True, front=True)
    multiplier.compose(b, [2, 3], inplace=True, front=True)

    # simulate and get the state of all qubits
    sv = Statevector(multiplier)
    counts = sv.probabilities_dict(decimals=10)
    state = list(counts.keys())[0]  # we only have a single state

    # skip both input registers
    result = state[:-2*num_state_qubits]
    print(result)  # '1001' = 9 = 3 * 3

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` class now can accept a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` value for the ``duration`` kwarg on its
  constructor and for its :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay.duration` attribute.

  For example::

      idle_dur = Parameter('t')
      qc = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      qc.x(0)
      qc.delay(idle_dur, 0, 'us')
      qc.measure(0, 0)
      print(qc)  # parameterized delay in us (micro seconds)

      # assign before transpilation
      assigned = qc.assign_parameters({idle_dur: 0.1})
      print(assigned)  # delay in us
      transpiled = transpile(assigned, some_backend_with_dt)
      print(transpiled)  # delay in dt

      # assign after transpilation
      transpiled = transpile(qc, some_backend_with_dt)
      print(transpiled)  # parameterized delay in dt
      assigned = transpiled.assign_parameters({idle_dur: 0.1})
      print(assigned)  # delay in dt

- A new binary serialization format, `QPY`, has been introduced. It is
  designed to be a fast binary serialization format that is backwards
  compatible (QPY files generated with older versions of Qiskit can be
  loaded by newer versions of Qiskit) that is native to Qiskit. The QPY
  serialization tooling is available  via the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization` module. For example, to generate a
  QPY file::

    from datetime import datetime

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit import qpy_serialization

    qc = QuantumCircuit(
      2, metadata={'created_at': datetime.utcnow().isoformat()}
    )
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    qc.measure_all()

    circuits = [qc] * 5

    with open('five_bells.qpy', 'wb') as qpy_file:
        qpy_serialization.dump(circuits, qpy_file)

  Then the five circuits saved in the QPY file can be loaded with::

    from qiskit.circuit.qpy_serialization

    with open('five_bells.qpy', 'rb') as qpy_file:
        circuits = qpy_serialization.load(qpy_file)

  The QPY file format specification is available in the module documentation.

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.TwoQubitBasisDecomposer` class has been
  updated to perform pulse optimal decompositions for a basis with CX, X, and
  virtual Rz gates as described in
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.08571. Pulse optimal here means that
  the duration of gates between the CX gates of the decomposition is
  reduced in exchange for possibly more local gates before or after
  all the CX gates such that, when composed into a circuit, there is the
  possibility of single qubit compression with neighboring gates
  reducing the overall sequence duration.

  A new keyword argument, ```pulse_optimize``, has been added to the constructor
  for :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.TwoQubitBasisDecomposer` to control this:

  * ``None``: Attempt pulse optimal decomposition. If a pulse optimal
    decomposition is unknown for the basis of the decomposer, drop
    back to the standard decomposition without warning. This is the default
    setting.
  * ``True``: Attempt pulse optimal decomposition. If a pulse optimal
    decomposition is unknown for the basis of the decomposer, raise
    `QiskitError`.
  * ``False``: Do not attempt pulse optimal decomposition.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

       from qiskit.quantum_info import TwoQubitBasisDecomposer
       from qiskit.circuit.library import CXGate
       from qiskit.quantum_info import random_unitary

       unitary_matrix = random_unitary(4)

       decomposer = TwoQubitBasisDecomposer(CXGate(), euler_basis="ZSX", pulse_optimize=True)
       circuit = decomposer(unitary_matrix)

- The transpiler pass :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.synthesis.UnitarySynthesis`
  located in :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` has been updated to support performing
  pulse optimal decomposition. This is done primarily with the the
  ``pulse_optimize`` keyword argument which was added to the constructor and
  used to control whether pulse optimal synthesis is performed. The behavior of
  this kwarg mirrors the ``pulse_optimize`` kwarg in the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.TwoQubitBasisDecomposer` class's constructor.
  Additionally, the constructor has another new keyword argument, ``synth_gates``,
  which is used to specify the list of gate names over which synthesis should be attempted. If
  ``None`` and ``pulse_optimize`` is ``False`` or ``None``, use ``"unitary"``.
  If `None` and `pulse_optimize` is ``True``, use ``"unitary"`` and ``"swap"``.
  Since the direction of the CX gate in the synthesis is arbitrary, another
  keyword argument, ``natural_direction``, is added to consider first
  a coupling map and then :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate` durations in
  choosing for which direction of CX to generate the synthesis.

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, CouplingMap
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import TrivialLayout, UnitarySynthesis
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeVigo
      from qiskit.quantum_info.random import random_unitary

      backend = FakeVigo()
      conf = backend.configuration()
      coupling_map = CouplingMap(conf.coupling_map)
      triv_layout_pass = TrivialLayout(coupling_map)
      circ = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circ.unitary(random_unitary(4), [0, 1])
      unisynth_pass = UnitarySynthesis(
          basis_gates=conf.basis_gates,
          coupling_map=None,
          backend_props=backend.properties(),
          pulse_optimize=True,
          natural_direction=True,
          synth_gates=['unitary'])
      pm = PassManager([triv_layout_pass, unisynth_pass])
      optimal_circ = pm.run(circ)

- A new basis option, ``'XZX'``, was added for the ``basis`` argument
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` class.

- Added a new method, :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.get_instructions`,
  was added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This method
  is used to return all :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` objects in the
  circuit which have a :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction.name` that matches
  the provided ``name`` argument along with its associated ``qargs`` and
  ``cargs`` lists of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit` objects.

- A new optional extra ``all`` has been added to the qiskit-terra package.
  This enables installing all the optional requirements with a single
  extra, for example: ``pip install 'qiskit-terra[all]'``, Previously, it
  was necessary to list all the extras individually to install all the
  optional dependencies simultaneously.

- Added two new classes :class:`~qiskit.result.ProbDistribution` and
  :class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution` for dealing with probability
  distributions and quasiprobability distributions respectively. These objects
  both are dictionary subclasses that add additional methods for working
  with probability and quasiprobability distributions.

- Added a new :attr:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer.settings`
  property to the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.Optimizer` abstract
  base class that all the optimizer classes in the
  :mod:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers` module are based on. This property
  will return a Python dictionary of the settings for the optimizer
  that can be used to instantiate another instance of the same optimizer
  class. For example::

    from qiskit.algorithms.optimizers import GradientDescent

    optimizer = GradientDescent(maxiter=10, learning_rate=0.01)
    settings = optimizer.settings
    new_optimizer = GradientDescent(**settings)

  The ``settings`` dictionary is also potentially useful for serializing
  optimizer objects using JSON or another serialization format.

- A new function, :func:`~qiskit.user_config.set_config`, has been added
  to the :mod:`qiskit.user_config` module. This function enables setting
  values in a user config from the Qiskit API. For example::

    from qiskit.user_config import set_config
    set_config("circuit_drawer", "mpl", section="default", file="settings.conf")

  which will result in adding a value of ``circuit_drawer = mpl`` to the
  ``default`` section in the ``settings.conf`` file.

  If no ``file_path`` argument is specified, the currently used path to the
  user config file (either the value of the ``QISKIT_SETTINGS`` environment
  variable if set or the default location ``~/.qiskit/settings.conf``) will be
  updated. However, changes to the existing config file will not be reflected in
  the current session since the config file is parsed at import time.

- Added a new state class, :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerState`,
  to the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. This class represents a
  stabilizer simulator state using the convention from
  `Aaronson and Gottesman (2004) <https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0406196>`__.

- Two new options, ``'value'`` and ``'value_desc'`` were added to the
  ``sort`` kwarg of the :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram` function.
  When ``sort`` is set to either of these options the output visualization
  will sort the x axis based on the maximum probability for each bitstring.
  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.visualization import plot_histogram

    counts = {
      '000': 5,
      '001': 25,
      '010': 125,
      '011': 625,
      '100': 3125,
      '101': 15625,
      '110': 78125,
      '111': 390625,
    }
    plot_histogram(counts, sort='value')


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- When running :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` (and functions that
  internally call :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` such as
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble`)
  on Python 3.9 with ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` set to True in some scenarios it is
  possible for the program to deadlock and never finish running. To avoid
  this from happening the default for Python 3.9 was changed to not run in
  parallel, but if ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` is explicitly enabled then this
  can still occur.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The minimum version of the `retworkx <https://pypi.org/project/retworkx/>`_ dependency
  was increased to version `0.9.0`. This was done to use new APIs introduced in that release
  which improved the performance of some transpiler passes.

- The default value for ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` on Python 3.9 environments has
  changed to ``False``, this means that when running on Python 3.9 by default
  multiprocessing will not be used. This was done to avoid a potential
  deadlock/hanging issue that can occur when running multiprocessing on
  Python 3.9 (see the known issues section for more detail). It is still
  possible to manual enable it by explicitly setting the ``QISKIT_PARALLEL``
  environment variable to ``TRUE``.

- The existing fake backend classes in ``qiskit.test.mock`` now strictly
  implement the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` interface. This means
  that if you were manually constructing :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` or
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` object for use with the ``run()`` method
  this will no longer work. The ``run()`` method only accepts
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` or :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`
  objects now. This was necessary to enable testing of new backends
  implemented without qobj which previously did not have any testing inside
  qiskit terra. If you need to leverage the fake backends with
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` or :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` new
  fake legacy backend objects were added to explicitly test the legacy
  providers interface. This will be removed after the legacy interface is
  deprecated and removed. Moving forward new fake backends will only
  implement the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` interface and will not
  add new legacy backend classes for new fake backends.

- When creating a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` object with an invalid
  string label, a :class:`~qiskit.exceptions.QiskitError` is now raised.
  This is a change from previous releases which would raise an
  ``AttributeError`` on an invalid string label. This change was made to
  ensure the error message is more informative and distinct from a generic
  ``AttributeError``.

- The output program representation from the pulse builder
  (:func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.build`) has changed from a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` to a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`. This new representation disables
  some timing related operations such as shift and insert. However, this
  enables parameterized instruction durations within the builder context.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit import pulse
      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

      dur = Parameter('duration')

      with pulse.build() as sched:
          with pulse.align_sequential():
              pulse.delay(dur, pulse.DriveChannel(1))
              pulse.play(pulse.Gaussian(dur, 0.1, dur/4), pulse.DriveChannel(0))

      assigned0 = sched.assign_parameters({dur: 100})
      assigned1 = sched.assign_parameters({dur: 200})

  You can directly pass the duration-assigned schedules to the assembler (or backend),
  or you can attach them to your quantum circuit as pulse gates.

- The `tweedledum <https://pypi.org/project/tweedledum/>`__ library which
  was previously an optional dependency has been made a requirement. This
  was done because of the wide use of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle` (which depends on
  having tweedledum installed) with several algorithms
  from :mod:`qiskit.algorithms`.

- The optional extra ``full-featured-simulators`` which could previously used
  to install ``qiskit-aer`` with something like
  ``pip install qiskit-terra[full-featured-simulators]`` has been removed
  from the qiskit-terra package. If this was being used to install
  ``qiskit-aer`` with ``qiskit-terra`` instead you should rely on the
  `qiskit <https://pypi.org/project/qiskit/>`__ metapackage or just install
  qiskit-terra and qiskit-aer together with
  ``pip install qiskit-terra qiskit-aer``.

- A new requirement `symengine <https://pypi.org/project/symengine>`__ has
  been added for Linux (on x86_64, aarch64, and ppc64le) and macOS users
  (x86_64 and arm64). It is an optional dependency on Windows (and available
  on PyPi as a precompiled package for 64bit Windows) and other
  architectures. If it is installed it provides significantly improved
  performance for the evaluation of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` objects.

- All library circuit classes, i.e. all :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` derived
  classes in :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`, are now wrapped in a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` (or :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate`, if they are
  unitary). For example, importing and drawing the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QFT`
  circuit:

  .. code-block::python

      from qiskit.circuit.library import QFT

      qft = QFT(3)
      print(qft.draw())

  before looked like

  .. code-block::

                                                
      q_0:  H X
                                  P(/2)  
      q_1:  H 
            P(/2)  P(/4)                
      q_2:  H X
           

  and now looks like

  .. code-block::

           
      q_0: 0     
                 
      q_1: 1 QFT 
                 
      q_2: 2     
           

  To obtain the old circuit, you can call the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.decompose` method on the circuit

  .. code-block::python

      from qiskit.circuit.library import QFT

      qft = QFT(3)
      print(qft.decompose().draw())

  This change was primarily made for consistency as before this release some
  circuit classes in :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` were previously wrapped
  in an :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` or :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate`
  but not all.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The class :class:`qiskit.exceptions.QiskitIndexError`
  is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. This exception
  was not actively being used by anything in Qiskit, if you were using
  it you can create a custom exception class to replace it.

- The kwargs ``epsilon`` and ``factr`` for the
  :class:`qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.L_BFGS_B` constructor
  and ``factr`` kwarg of the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.P_BFGS`
  optimizer class are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead, please
  use the ``eps`` karg instead of ``epsilon``. The ``factr`` kwarg is
  replaced with ``ftol``. The relationship between the two is
  :code:`ftol = factr * numpy.finfo(float).eps`. This change was made
  to be consistent with the usage of the ``scipy.optimize.minimize``
  functions ``'L-BFGS-B'`` method. See the:
  ``scipy.optimize.minimize(method='L-BFGS-B')``
  `documentation <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/optimize.minimize-lbfgsb.html>`__
  for more information on how these new parameters are used.

- The legacy providers interface, which consisted of the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.BaseBackend`, :class:`qiskit.providers.BaseJob`,
  and :class:`qiskit.providers.BaseProvider` abstract classes, has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should use
  the versioned interface, which the current abstract class versions are
  :class:`qiskit.providers.BackendV1`, :class:`qiskit.providers.JobV1`, and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ProviderV1`. The V1 objects are mostly backwards
  compatible to ease migration from the legacy interface to the versioned
  one. However, expect future versions of the abstract interfaces to diverge
  more. You can refer to the :mod:`qiskit.providers` documentation for
  more high level details about the versioned interface.

- The ``condition`` kwarg to the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDepNode` constructor along with the
  corresponding :attr:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDepNode.condition` attribute
  of the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDepNode` have been deprecated and
  will be removed in a future release. Instead, you can access the
  ``condition`` of a ``DAGDepNode`` if the node is of type ``op``, by using
  ``DAGDepNode.op.condition``.

- The :attr:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode.condition` attribute of the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` class has been deprecated and
  will be removed in a future release. Instead, you can access the
  ``condition`` of a ``DAGNode`` object if the node is of type ``op``, by
  using ``DAGNode.op.condition``.

- The pulse builder (:func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.build`) syntax
  :func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.inline` is deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Instead of using this context, you can just remove alignment
  contexts within the inline context.

- The pulse builder (:func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.build`) syntax
  :func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.pad` is deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. This was done because the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`
  now being returned by the pulse builder  doesn't support the ``.insert`` method
  (and there is no insert syntax in the builder). The use of timeslot placeholders
  to block the insertion of other instructions is no longer necessary.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.TwoQubitBasisDecomposer` classes for
  one and two qubit gate synthesis have been improved to tighten up
  tolerances, improved repeatability and simplification, and fix
  several global-phase-tracking bugs.

- Fixed an issue in the assignment of the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.name`
  attribute to :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` generated by multiple calls to
  the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.inverse`` method. Prior to this fix
  when the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.inverse`` was called it would
  unconditionally append ``_dg`` on each call to inverse. This has
  been corrected so on a second call of
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.inverse`` the ``_dg`` suffix is now removed.

- Fixes the triviality check conditions of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CZGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CRZGate`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CU1Gate`
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCU1Gate` in the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.HoareOptimizer` pass. Previously, in some cases
  the optimizer would remove these gates breaking the semantic equivalence of
  the transformation.

- Fixed an issue when converting a :class:`~qiskit.opflow.list_ops.ListOp`
  object of :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PauliSumOp` objects using
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.PauliExpectation` or
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.AerPauliExpectation`. Previously, it would raise
  a warning about it converting to a Pauli representation which is
  potentially expensive. This has been fixed by instead of internally
  converting the :class:`~qiskit.opflow.list_ops.ListOp` to a
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.list_ops.SummedOp` of
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PauliOp` objects, it now creates
  a :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PauliSumOp` which is more
  efficient.
  Fixed `#6159 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6159>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.NLocal` class
  in the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module where it wouldn't properly
  raise an exception at object initialization if an invalid type was
  used for the ``reps`` kwarg which would result in an unexpected runtime
  error later. A ``TypeError`` will now be properly raised if the ``reps``
  kwarg is not an ``int`` value.
  Fixed `#6515 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6515>`__

- Fixed an issue where the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.TwoLocal` class
  in the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module did not accept numpy integer
  types (e.g. ``numpy.int32``, ``numpy.int64``, etc) as a valid input for
  the ``entanglement`` kwarg.
  Fixed `#6455 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6455>`__

- When loading an OpenQASM2 file or string with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuitQuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file` or
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuitQuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` constructors for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class, if the OpenQASM2 circuit
  contains an instruction with the name ``delay`` this will be mapped to
  a :class:`qiskit.circuit.Delay` instruction. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

     from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

     qasm = """OPENQASM 2.0;
     include "qelib1.inc";
     opaque delay(time) q;
     qreg q[1];
     delay(172) q[0];
     u3(0.1,0.2,0.3) q[0];
     """
     circuit = QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str(qasm)
     circuit.draw()

  Fixed `#6510 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6510>`__

- Fixed an issue with addition between
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PauliSumOp` objects that had
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` coefficients. Previously
  this would result in a ``QiskitError`` exception being raised because
  the addition of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` was
  not handled correctly. This has been fixed so that addition can be
  performed between :class:`~qiskit.opflow.primitive_ops.PauliSumOp`
  objects with :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` coefficients.

- Fixed an issue with the initialization of the
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.AmplificationProblem` class. The
  ``is_good_state`` kwarg was a required field but incorrectly being treated
  as optional (and documented as such). This has been fixed and also
  updated so unless the input ``oracle`` is a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle` object (which provides it's
  on evaluation method) the field is required and will raise a ``TypeError``
  when constructed without ``is_good_state``.

- Fixed an issue where adding a control to a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` with open controls would unset
  the inner open controls.
  Fixes `#5857 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5857>`__

- Fixed an issue with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.PauliExpectation.convert` method of
  the :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.PauliExpectation` class where
  calling it on an operator that was non-Hermitian would return
  an incorrect result.
  Fixed `#6307 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6307>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`qiskit.pulse.transforms.inline_subroutines`
  function which would previously incorrectly not remove all the nested
  components when called on nested schedules.
  Fixed `#6321 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6321>`__

- Fixed an issue when passing a partially bound callable created with
  the Python standard library's ``functools.partial()`` function as the
  ``schedule`` kwarg to the
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap.add` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` class, which would previously
  result in an error.
  Fixed `#6278 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6278>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseChebyshev`
  when setting the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseChebyshev.breakpoints` to ``None``
  on an existing object was incorrectly being treated as a breakpoint. This
  has been corrected so that when it is set to ``None`` this will switch back
  to the default  behavior of approximating over the full interval.
  Fixed `#6198 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6198>`__

- Fixed an issue with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_connected_components` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` which was returning the incorrect
  number of components when the circuit contains two or more gates conditioned
  on classical registers.
  Fixed `#6477 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6477>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :mod:`qiskit.opflow.expectations` module
  where coefficients of a statefunction were not being multiplied correctly.
  This also fixed the calculations
  of Gradients and QFIs when using the
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.PauliExpectation` or
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.AerPauliExpectation` classes. For
  example, previously::

      from qiskit.opflow import StateFn, I, One

      exp = ~StateFn(I) @ (2 * One)

  evaluated to ``2``
  for :class:`~qiskit.opflow.expectations.AerPauliExpectation` and to ``4``
  for other expectation converters. Since ``~StateFn(I) @ (2 * One)`` is a
  shorthand notation for ``~(2 * One) @ I @ (2 * One)``, the now correct
  coefficient of ``4`` is returned for all expectation converters.
  Fixed `#6497 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6497>`__

- Fixed the bug that caused :meth:`~qiskit.opflow.PauliOp.to_circuit` to fail when
  :class:`~qiskit.opflow.PauliOp` had a phase. At the same time, it was made more efficient to
  use :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.generalized_gates.PauliGate`.

- Fixed an issue where the QASM output generated by the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` for composite gates such as
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXGate` and its variants (
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXGrayCode`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXRecursive`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXVChain`) would be incorrect. Now if a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` in the circuit is not present in
  ``qelib1.inc``, its definition is added to the output QASM string.
  Fixed `#4943 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4943>`__ and
  `#3945 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3945>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. When using the ``mpl`` or ``latex``
  output modes, with the ``cregbundle`` kwarg set to ``False`` and the
  ``reverse_bits`` kwarg set to ``True``, the bits in the classical registers
  displayed in the same order as when ``reverse_bits`` was set to ``False``.

- Fixed an issue when using the :class:`qiskit.extensions.Initialize`
  instruction which was not correctly setting the global phase of the
  synthesized definition when constructed.
  Fixed `#5320 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5230>`__

- Fixed an issue where the bit-order in
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle.evaluate_bitstring` did not agree
  with the order of the measured bitstring. This fix also affects the
  execution of the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.Grover` algorithm class if the
  oracle is specified as a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle`, which
  now will now correctly identify the correct bitstring.
  Fixed `#6314 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6314>`__

- Fixes a bug in :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`
  previously causing certain short sequences of gates to erroneously not be
  rewritten.

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`qiskit.opflow.gradients.Gradient.gradient_wrapper`
  method with the gradient calculation. Previously, if the operator was
  not diagonal an incorrect result would be returned in some situations.
  This has been fixed by using an expectation converter to ensure the
  result is always correct.

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`
  function and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with all output modes
  where it would incorrectly render a custom instruction that includes
  classical bits in some circumstances.
  Fixed `#3201 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3201>`__,
  `#3202 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3202>`__, and
  `#6178 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6178>`__

- Fixed an issue in :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` and the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class when using the ``mpl``
  output mode, controlled-Z Gates were incorrectly drawn as asymmetrical.
  Fixed `#5981 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5981>`__

- Fixed an issue with the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.OptimizeSwapBeforeMeasure` transpiler pass
  where in some situations a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SwapGate`
  that that contained a classical condition would be removed.
  Fixed `#6192 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6192>`__

- Fixed an issue with the phase of the
  :class:`qiskit.opflow.gradients.QFI` class when the ``qfi_method`` is set
  to ``lin_comb_full`` which caused the incorrect observable to be evaluated.

- Fixed an issue with :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE` algorithm class
  when run with the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.L_BFGS_B`
  or :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.P_BFGS` optimizer classes and
  gradients are used, the gradient was incorrectly passed as a numpy array
  instead of the expected list of floats resulting in an error. This has
  been resolved so you can use gradients with :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.VQE`
  and the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.L_BFGS_B` or
  :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.P_BFGS` optimizers.


.. _Release Notes_0.18.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The deprecation of the :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction.parameters` method
  for the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction` class has been reversed. This
  method was originally deprecated in the 0.17.0, but it is still necessary
  for several applications, including when running calibration experiments.
  This method will continue to be supported and will **not** be removed.

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.4
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.15.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.15.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Add support for new method :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeJob.error_message`
  which will return a string representing the reason if the job failed.

- The `inputs` parameter to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.run`
  method can now be specified as a
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.ParameterNamespace` instance which
  supports auto-complete features. You can use
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeProgram.parameters` to retrieve
  an ``ParameterNamespace`` instance.

  For example::

      from qiskit import IBMQ

      provider = IBMQ.load_account()

      # Set the "sample-program" program parameters.
      params = provider.runtime.program(program_id="sample-program").parameters()
      params.iterations = 2

      # Configure backend options
      options = {'backend_name': 'ibmq_qasm_simulator'}

      # Execute the circuit using the "circuit-runner" program.
      job = provider.runtime.run(program_id="sample-program",
                                 options=options,
                                 inputs=params)

- The user can now set the visibility (private/public) of a Qiskit Runtime program using
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.set_program_visibility`.

- An optional boolean parameter `pending` has been added to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.jobs`
  and it allows filtering jobs by their status.
  If `pending` is not specified all jobs are returned.
  If `pending` is set to True, 'QUEUED' and 'RUNNING' jobs are returned.
  If `pending` is set to False, 'DONE', 'ERROR' and 'CANCELLED' jobs are returned.

- Add support for the ``use_measure_esp`` flag in the
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method. If ``True``, the backend will use ESP
  readout for all measurements which are the terminal instruction on that qubit. If used and
  the backend does not support ESP readout, an error is raised.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.15.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeProgram.parameters` is now a
  method that returns a
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.ParameterNamespace` instance, which
  you can use to fill in runtime program parameter values and pass to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.IBMRuntimeService.run`.

- The ``open_pulse`` flag in backend configuration no longer indicates
  whether a backend supports pulse-level control. As a result,
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.configuration` may return a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` instance even
  if its ``open_pulse`` flag is ``False``.

- Job share level is no longer supported due to low adoption and the
  corresponding interface will be removed in a future release.
  This means you should no longer pass `share_level` when creating a job or use
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.share_level` method to get a job's share level.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.15.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The ``id`` instruction has been deprecated on IBM hardware
  backends. Instead, please use the ``delay`` instruction which
  implements variable-length delays, specified in units of
  ``dt``. When running a circuit containing an ``id`` instruction,
  a warning will be raised on job submission and any ``id``
  instructions in the job will be automatically replaced with their
  equivalent ``delay`` instruction.


*************
Qiskit 0.27.0
*************

Terra 0.17.4
============

No change

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.2
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.9.2_Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Removed version caps from the requirements list to enable installing with newer
  versions of dependencies.

IBM Q Provider 0.14.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.14.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- You can now use the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.runtime.RuntimeJob.logs`
  method to retrieve job logs. Note that logs are only available after the
  job finishes.

- A new backend configuration attribute ``input_allowed`` now tells you the
  types of input supported by the backend. Valid input types are ``job``, which
  means circuit jobs, and ``runtime``, which means Qiskit Runtime.

  You can also use ``input_allowed`` in backend filtering. For example::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    provider = IBMQ.load_account()
    # Get a list of all backends that support runtime.
    runtime_backends = provider.backends(input_allowed='runtime')


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.14.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` now uses a new package ``websocket-client`` as its
  websocket client, and packages ``websockets`` and ``nest-asyncio`` are no
  longer required. ``setup.py`` and ``requirements.txt`` have been updated
  accordingly.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.14.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue that uses ``shots=1`` instead of the documented default
  when no ``shots`` is specified for
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.run_circuits`.

- Fixes the issue wherein a ``QiskitBackendNotFoundError`` exception is raised
  when retrieving a runtime job that was submitted using a different provider
  than the one used for retrieval.

- Streaming runtime program interim results with proxies is now supported.
  You can specify the proxies to use when enabling the account as usual,
  for example::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    proxies = {'urls': {'https://127.0.0.1:8085'}}
    provider = IBMQ.enable_account(API_TOKEN, proxies=proxies)


*************
Qiskit 0.26.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.17.4:

Terra 0.17.4
============

.. _Release Notes_0.17.4_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` with
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` backends with the
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.`max_experiments`
  attribute set to a value less than the number of circuits to run. Previously
  the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` would not correctly split the
  circuits to run into separate jobs, which has been corrected.

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.13.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.26.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.17.3:

Terra 0.17.3
============

.. _Release Notes_0.17.3_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release includes 2 new classes,
:class:`~qiskit.result.ProbDistribution` and
:class:`~qiskit.result.QuasiDistribution`, which were needed for
compatibility with the recent qiskit-ibmq-provider release's beta support
for the
`qiskit-runtime <https://github.com/Qiskit-Partners/qiskit-runtime>`__.
These were only added for compatibility with that new feature in the
qiskit-ibmq-provider release and the API for these classes is considered
experimental and not considered stable for the 0.17.x release series. The
interface may change when 0.18.0 is released in the future.

.. _Release Notes_0.17.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue in :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram` function where a ``ValueError``
  would be raised when the function run on distributions with unequal lengths.

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.13.1
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.13.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release introduces a new feature ``Qiskit Runtime Service``.
Qiskit Runtime is a new architecture offered by IBM Quantum that significantly
reduces waiting time during computational iterations. You can execute your
experiments near the quantum hardware, without the interactions of multiple
layers of classical and quantum hardware slowing it down.

Qiskit Runtime allows authorized users to upload their Qiskit quantum programs,
which are Python code that takes certain inputs, performs quantum and maybe
classical computation, and returns the processing results. The same or other
authorized users can then invoke these quantum programs by simply passing in the
required input parameters.

Note that Qiskit Runtime is currently in private beta for select account but
will be released to the public in the near future.

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.13.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.analysis_result.AnalysisResult` now has an additional
  ``verified`` attribute which identifies if the ``quality`` has been verified by a human.

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.Experiment` now has an additional
  ``notes`` attribute which can be used to set notes on an experiment.

- This release introduces a new feature ``Qiskit Runtime Service``.
  Qiskit Runtime is a new architecture that
  significantly reduces waiting time during computational iterations.
  This new service allows authorized users to upload their Qiskit quantum
  programs, which are Python code that takes
  certain inputs, performs quantum and maybe classical computation, and returns
  the processing results. The same or other authorized users can then invoke
  these quantum programs by simply passing in the required input parameters.

  An example of using this new service::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    provider = IBMQ.load_account()
    # Print all avaiable programs.
    provider.runtime.pprint_programs()

    # Prepare the inputs. See program documentation on input parameters.
    inputs = {...}
    options = {"backend_name": provider.backend.ibmq_montreal.name()}

    job = provider.runtime.run(program_id="runtime-simple",
                               options=options,
                               inputs=inputs)
    # Check job status.
    print(f"job status is {job.status()}")

    # Get job result.
    result = job.result()

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.13.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The deprecated ``Human Bad``, ``Computer Bad``, ``Computer Good`` and
  ``Human Good`` enum values have been removed from
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.constants.ResultQuality`. They
  are replaced with ``Bad`` and ``Good`` values which should be used with
  the ``verified`` attribute on
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.analysis_result.AnalysisResult`:

  +---------------+-------------+----------+
  | Old Quality   | New Quality | Verified |
  +===============+=============+==========+
  | Human Bad     | Bad         | True     |
  +---------------+-------------+----------+
  | Computer Bad  | Bad         | False    |
  +---------------+-------------+----------+
  | Computer Good | Good        | False    |
  +---------------+-------------+----------+
  | Human Good    | Good        | True     |
  +---------------+-------------+----------+

  Furthermore, the ``NO_INFORMATION`` enum has been renamed to ``UNKNOWN``.

- The :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.defaults` method now always
  returns pulse defaults if they are available, regardless whether open
  pulse is enabled for the provider.

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.13.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue wherein passing in a noise model when sending a job to
  an IBMQ simulator would raise a ``TypeError``. Fixes
  `#894 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/894>`_

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.13.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.analysis_result.AnalysisResult`
  ``fit`` attribute is now optional.


*************
Qiskit 0.25.4
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.17.2:

Terra 0.17.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.17.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This is a bugfix release that fixes several issues from the 0.17.1 release.
Most importantly this release fixes compatibility for the
:class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class when running on backends that are
based on the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` abstract class. This fixes
all the algorithms and applications built on :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` or
:mod:`qiskit.opflow` when running on newer backends.

.. _Release Notes_0.17.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator`
  transpiler pass which in some cases would translate gates already in the
  target basis. This would potentially result in both longer execution time
  and less optimal results.
  Fixed `#6085 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6085>`__

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimisers.SPSA` when
  the optimizer was initialized with a callback function via the ``callback``
  kwarg would potentially cause an error to be raised.

- Fixed an issue in the
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.expectation_value`
  and :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.expectation_value`methods
  where the ``qargs`` kwarg was ignored if the operator was a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` or
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` operator object.
  Fixed `#6303 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6303>`__

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.evolve` method
  which could have resulted in the incorrect Pauli being returned when
  evolving by a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CZGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CYGate`, or a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SwapGate` gate.

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`qiskit.opflow.SparseVectorStateFn.to_dict_fn`
  method, which previously had at most one entry for the all zero state due
  to an index error.

- Fixed an issue in the :meth:`qiskit.opflow.SparseVectorStateFn.equals`
  method so that is properly returning ``True`` or ``False`` instead of a
  sparse vector comparison of the single elements.

- Fixes an issue in the :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` probability methods
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.probabilities`,
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.probabilities_dict`,
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.probabilities`,
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.probabilities_dict`
  where the returned probabilities could have incorrect ordering
  for certain values of the ``qargs`` kwarg.
  Fixed `#6320 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6320>`__

- Fixed an issue where the :class:`~qiskit.opflow.TaperedPauliSumOp` class
  did not support the multiplication with
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` object and also did not have
  a necessary :meth:`~qiskit.opflow.TaperedPauliSumOp.assign_parameters`
  method for working with :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression`
  objects.
  Fixed `#6127 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6127>`__

- Fixed compatibility for the :class:`~qiskit.utils.QuantumInstance` class
  when running on backends that are based on the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1` abstract class.
  Fixed `#6280 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6280>`__

Aer 0.8.2
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.12.3
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.25.3
*************

Terra 0.17.1
============

No change

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.8.2:

Aer 0.8.2
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.8.2_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValue` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValueVariance` have
  been disabled for the `extended_stabilizer` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` due to returning the
  incorrect value for certain Pauli operator components. Refer to
  `#1227 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1227>` for more
  information and examples.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.8.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes performance issue with how the ``basis_gates`` configuration
  attribute was set. Previously there were unintended side-effects to the
  backend class which could cause repeated simulation runtime to
  incrementally increase. Refer to
  `#1229 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1229>` for more
  information and examples.

- Fixes a bug with the ``"multiplexer"`` simulator instruction where the
  order of target and control qubits was reversed to the order in the
  Qiskit instruction.

- Fixes a bug introduced in 0.8.0 where GPU simulations would allocate
  unneeded host memory in addition to the GPU memory.

- Fixes a bug in the ``stabilizer`` simulator method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` where the expectation value
  for the ``save_expectation_value`` and ``snapshot_expectation_value``
  could have the wrong sign for certain ``Y`` Pauli's.


Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.12.3
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.25.2
*************

Terra 0.17.1
============

No change

Aer 0.8.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.12.3
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.3_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.analysis_result.AnalysisResult` ``fit``
  attribute is now optional.

*************
Qiskit 0.25.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.17.1:

Terra 0.17.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.17.1_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This is a bugfix release that fixes several issues from the 0.17.0 release.
Most importantly this release fixes the incorrectly constructed sdist
package for the 0.17.0 release which was not actually buildable and was
blocking installation on platforms without precompiled binaries available.

.. _Release Notes_0.17.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue where the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase`
  attribute would not be preserved in the output
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object when the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` method was called.
  For example::

    import math
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(3, 2, global_phase=math.pi)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.s(1)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    qc.measure(0, 1)
    qc.x(0)
    qc.y(1)

    reversed = qc.reverse_bits()
    print(reversed.global_phase)

  will now correctly print :math:`\pi`.

- Fixed an issue where the transpiler pass
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Unroller` didn't
  preserve global phase in case of nested instructions with one rule in
  their definition.
  Fixed `#6134 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/6134>`__

- Fixed an issue where the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.parameter`
  attribute of a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` object built from
  a :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` was not being set to the
  unitary matrix of the :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` object.
  Previously, :meth:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate.control` was building a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` with the ``parameter`` attribute
  set to the controlled version of
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` matrix.
  This would lead to a modification of the ``parameter`` of the base
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` object and subsequent calls to
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.inverse` was creating
  the inverse of a double-controlled :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate`.
  Fixed `#5750 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5750>`__

- Fixed an issue with the preset pass managers
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_0_pass_manager` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_1_pass_manager`
  (which corresponds to ``optimization_level`` 0 and 1 for
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`) where in some cases they would
  produce circuits not in the requested basis.

- Fix a bug where using :class:`~qiskit.algorithms.optimizers.SPSA` with automatic
  calibration of the learning rate and perturbation (i.e. ``learning_rate`` and
  ``perturbation`` are ``None`` in the initializer), stores the calibration for all
  future optimizations. Instead, the calibration should be done for each new objective
  function.

.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.1:

Aer 0.8.1
=========

.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue with use of the ``matrix_product_state`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` simulators when running a
  noisy simulation with Kraus errors. Previously, the matrix product state
  simulation method would not propogate changes to neighboring qubits after
  applying the Kraus matrix. This has been fixed so the output from the
  simulation is correct.
  Fixed `#1184 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1184>`__ and
  `#1205 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1205>`__

- Fixed an issue where the :class:`qiskit.extensions.Initialize` instruction
  would disable measurement sampling optimization for the ``statevector`` and
  ``matrix_product_state`` simulation methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` simulators, even when it was
  the first circuit instruction or applied to all qubits and hence
  deterministic.
  Fixed `#1210 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1210>`__

- Fix an issue with the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveStatevector`
  and :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotStatevector`
  instructions when used with the ``extended_stabilizer`` simulation method
  of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` simulators where it would
  return an unnormalized statevector.
  Fixed `#1196 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1210>`__

- The ``matrix_product_state`` simulation method now has support for it's
  previously missing set state instruction,
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SetMatrixProductState`, which enables
  setting the state of a simulation in a circuit.

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.9.1
==========

IBM Q Provider 0.12.2
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.25.0
*************

This release officially deprecates the Qiskit Aqua project. Accordingly, in a
future release the ``qiskit-aqua`` package will be removed from the Qiskit
metapackage, which means in that future release ``pip install qiskit`` will no
longer include ``qiskit-aqua``. The application modules that are provided by
qiskit-aqua have been split into several new packages:
``qiskit-optimization``, ``qiskit-nature``, ``qiskit-machine-learning``, and
``qiskit-finance``. These packages can be installed by themselves (via the
standard pip install command, e.g. ``pip install qiskit-nature``) or with the
rest of the Qiskit metapackage as optional extras (e.g.
``pip install 'qiskit[finance,optimization]'`` or ``pip install 'qiskit[all]'``
The core algorithms and the operator flow now exist as part of qiskit-terra at
:mod:`qiskit.algorithms` and :mod:`qiskit.opflow`. Depending on your existing
usage of Aqua you should either use the application packages or the new modules
in Qiskit Terra. For more details on how to migrate from Qiskit Aqua you can
refer to the :ref:`aqua-migration`.

.. _Release Notes_0.17.0:

Terra 0.17.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The Qiskit Terra 0.17.0 includes many new features and bug fixes. The major
new feature for this release is the introduction of the
:mod:`qiskit.algorithms` and :mod:`qiskit.opflow` modules which were
migrated and adapted from the :mod:`qiskit.aqua` project.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The :py:func:`qiskit.pulse.call` function can now take a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` object along with a parameterized
  subroutine. This enables assigning different values to the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects for each subroutine call.

  For example,

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    from qiskit import pulse

    amp = Parameter('amp')

    with pulse.build() as subroutine:
        pulse.play(pulse.Gaussian(160, amp, 40), DriveChannel(0))

    with pulse.build() as main_prog:
        pulse.call(subroutine, amp=0.1)
        pulse.call(subroutine, amp=0.3)

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.models.QasmBackendConfiguration` has a new
  field ``processor_type`` which can optionally be used to provide
  information about a backend's processor in the form:
  ``{"family": <str>, "revision": <str>, segment: <str>}``. For example:
  ``{"family": "Canary", "revision": "1.0", segment: "A"}``.

- The :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule`,
  :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction`, and :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.Channel`
  classes now have a :attr:`~qiiskit.pulse.Schedule.parameter` property
  which will return any :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects used
  in the object and a :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule.is_parameterized()`
  method which will return ``True`` if any parameters are used in the
  object.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
      from qiskit import pulse

      shift = Parameter('alpha')

      schedule = pulse.Schedule()
      schedule += pulse.SetFrequency(shift, pulse.DriveChannel(0))

      assert schedule.is_parameterized() == True
      print(schedule.parameters)

- Added a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseChebyshev` to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` for implementing a piecewise Chebyshev
  approximation of an input function. For a given function :math:`f(x)`
  and degree :math:`d`, this class class implements
  a piecewise polynomial Chebyshev approximation on :math:`n` qubits
  to :math:`f(x)` on the given intervals. All the polynomials in the
  approximation are of degree :math:`d`.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      import numpy as np
      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library.arithmetic.piecewise_chebyshev import PiecewiseChebyshev
      f_x, degree, breakpoints, num_state_qubits = lambda x: np.arcsin(1 / x), 2, [2, 4], 2
      pw_approximation = PiecewiseChebyshev(f_x, degree, breakpoints, num_state_qubits)
      pw_approximation._build()
      qc = QuantumCircuit(pw_approximation.num_qubits)
      qc.h(list(range(num_state_qubits)))
      qc.append(pw_approximation.to_instruction(), qc.qubits)
      qc.draw(output='mpl')

- The :py:class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties` class now
  has a :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties.readout_length`
  method, which returns the readout length [sec] of the given qubit.

- A new class, :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`, has been added to
  the :class:`qiskit.pulse` module. This class provides a new representation
  of a pulse program. This representation is best suited for the pulse
  builder syntax and is based on relative instruction ordering.

  This representation takes ``alignment_context`` instead of specifying
  starting time ``t0`` for each instruction. The start time of instruction is
  implicitly allocated with the specified transformation and relative
  position of instructions.

  The :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock` allows for lazy instruction
  scheduling, meaning we can assign arbitrary parameters to the duration of
  instructions.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.pulse import ScheduleBlock, DriveChannel, Gaussian
      from qiskit.pulse.instructions import Play, Call
      from qiskit.pulse.transforms import AlignRight
      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

      dur = Parameter('rabi_duration')

      block = ScheduleBlock(alignment_context=AlignRight())
      block += Play(Gaussian(dur, 0.1, dur/4), DriveChannel(0))
      block += Call(measure_sched)  # subroutine defined elsewhere

  this code defines an experiment scanning a Gaussian pulse's duration
  followed by a measurement ``measure_sched``, i.e. a Rabi experiment.
  You can reuse the ``block`` object for every scanned duration
  by assigning a target duration value.

- Added a new function :func:`~qiskit.visualization.array_to_latex` to
  the :mod:`qiskit.visualization` module that can be used to represent
  and visualize vectors and matrices with LaTeX.

  .. jupyter-execute::

          from qiskit.visualization import array_to_latex
          from numpy import sqrt, exp, pi
          mat = [[0, exp(pi*.75j)],
                 [1/sqrt(8), 0.875]]
          array_to_latex(mat)

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes now have
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.draw` methods which allow objects
  to be drawn as either text matrices, IPython Latex objects, Latex source,
  Q-spheres, Bloch spheres and Hinton plots. By default the output type
  is the equivalent output from ``__repr__`` but this default can be changed
  in a user config file by setting the ``state_drawer`` option. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

          from qiskit.quantum_info import DensityMatrix
          dm = DensityMatrix.from_label('r0')
          dm.draw('latex')

  .. jupyter-execute::

          from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector
          sv = Statevector.from_label('+r')
          sv.draw('qsphere')

  Additionally, the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.draw` method
  is now used for the ipython display of these classes, so if you change the
  default output type in a user config file then when a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` or a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` object are displayed in
  a jupyter notebook that output type will be used for the object.

- Pulse :class:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction` objects and
  parametric pulse objects (eg :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Gaussian` now
  support using :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` objects for the ``duration``
  parameter. For example:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    from qiskit.pulse import Gaussian

    dur = Parameter('x_pulse_duration')
    double_dur = dur * 2
    rx_pulse = Gaussian(dur, 0.1, dur/4)
    double_rx_pulse = Gaussian(double_dir, 0.1, dur/4)

  Note that while we can create an instruction with a parameterized
  ``duration`` adding an instruction with unbound parameter ``duration``
  to a schedule is supported only by the newly introduced representation
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`. See the known issues release notes
  section for more details.

- The :meth:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy.run` method for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.StatevectorSimulatorPy`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.UnitarySimulatorPy` backends now takes a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` (or a list of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects) as its input.
  The previous :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` object is still supported for
  now, but will be deprecated in a future release.

  For an example of how to use this see::

    from qiskit import transpile, QuantumCircuit

    from qiskit.providers.basicaer import BasicAer

    backend = BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator')

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()

    tqc = transpile(circuit, backend)
    result = backend.run(tqc, shots=4096).result()

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CommutativeCancellation` transpiler
  pass has a new optional kwarg on the constructor ``basis_gates``, which
  takes the a list of the names of basis gates for the target backend.
  When specified the pass will only use gates in the ``basis_gates`` kwarg.
  Previously, the pass would automatically replace consecutive gates which
  commute with :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZGate` with the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U1Gate` unconditionally. The ``basis_gates``
  kwarg enables you to specify which z-rotation gates are present in
  the target basis to avoid this.

- The constructors of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` class and subclasses,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.AncillaQubit`, have been updated such that their
  two parameters, ``register`` and ``index`` are now optional. This enables
  the creation of bit objects that are independent of a register.

- A new class,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction.BooleanExpression`, has been
  added to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction` module. This class
  allows for creating an oracle from a Python boolean expression. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import BooleanExpression, QuantumCircuit

    expression = BooleanExpression('~x & (y | z)')
    circuit = QuantumCircuit(4)
    circuit.append(expression, [0, 1, 2, 3])
    circuit.draw('mpl')

  .. jupyter-execute::

    circuit.decompose().draw('mpl')

  The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction.BooleanExpression` also
  includes a method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction.BooleanExpression.from_dimacs_file`,
  which allows loading formulas described in the
  `DIMACS-CNF <https://people.sc.fsu.edu/~jburkardt/data/cnf/cnf.html>`__
  format. For example:

  .. code-block::

    from qiskit.circuit import BooleanExpression, QuantumCircuit

    boolean_exp = BooleanExpression.from_dimacs_file("simple_v3_c2.cnf")
    circuit = QuantumCircuit(boolean_exp.num_qubits)
    circuit.append(boolean_exp, range(boolean_exp.num_qubits))
    circuit.draw('text')

  .. parsed-literal::

         
    q_0: 0                  
                            
    q_1: 1                  
           SIMPLE_V3_C2.CNF 
    q_2: 2                  
                            
    q_3: 3                  
         

  .. code-block::

    circuit.decompose().draw('text')

  .. parsed-literal::

    q_0: oo
               
    q_1: o
                   
    q_2: o
         
    q_3:  X  X  X  X 
         

- Added a new class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle`, has been
  added to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module. This class enables the
  construction of phase oracle circuits from Python boolean expressions.

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit.library.phase_oracle import PhaseOracle

    oracle = PhaseOracle('x1 & x2 & (not x3)')
    oracle.draw('mpl')

  These phase oracles can be used as part of a larger algorithm, for example
  with :class:`qiskit.algorithms.AmplificationProblem`:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.algorithms import AmplificationProblem, Grover
    from qiskit import BasicAer

    backend = BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator')

    problem = AmplificationProblem(oracle, is_good_state=oracle.evaluate_bitstring)
    grover = Grover(quantum_instance=backend)
    result = grover.amplify(problem)
    result.top_measurement

  The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle` class also includes a
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseOracle.from_dimacs_file` method which
  enables constructing a phase oracle from a file describing a formula in the
  `DIMACS-CNF <https://people.sc.fsu.edu/~jburkardt/data/cnf/cnf.html>`__
  format.

  .. code-block::

    from qiskit.circuit.library.phase_oracle import PhaseOracle

    oracle = PhaseOracle.from_dimacs_file("simple_v3_c2.cnf")
    oracle.draw('text')

  .. parsed-literal::

     state_0: oo
                  
     state_1:  X  X 
                     
     state_2: o Z 
                                 

- All transpiler passes (ie any instances of
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.BasePass`) are now directly callable.
  Calling a pass provides a convenient interface for running the pass
  on a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object.

  For example, running a single transformation pass, such as
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator`, can be done with:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import BasisTranslator
    from qiskit.circuit.equivalence_library import SessionEquivalenceLibrary as sel

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
    circuit.h(0)

    pass_instance = BasisTranslator(sel, ['rx', 'rz', 'cx'])
    result = pass_instance(circuit)
    result.draw(output='mpl')

  When running an analysis pass, a property set (as ``dict`` or as
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PropertySet`)
  needs to be added as a parameter and it might be modified "in-place".
  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import Depth

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
    circuit.h(0)

    property_set = {}
    pass_instance = Depth()
    pass_instance(circuit, property_set)
    print(property_set)

- The :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig` class now has an optional
  kwarg for ``meas_level`` and ``meas_return``. These fields can be used
  to enable generating :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` job payloads that
  support ``meas_level=1`` (kerneled data) for circuit jobs (previously
  this was only exposed for :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` objects).
  The :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` function has been updated
  to set this field for :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` objects it
  generates.

- A new :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.tensor` method has been
  added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This
  method enables tensoring another circuit with an existing circuit.
  This method works analogously to
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.tensor`
  and is consistent with the little-endian convention of Qiskit.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    top = QuantumCircuit(1)
    top.x(0);
    bottom = QuantumCircuit(2)
    bottom.cry(0.2, 0, 1);
    bottom.tensor(top).draw(output='mpl')

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class now supports arbitrary
  free form metadata with the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.metadata`
  attribute. A user (or program built on top of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`) can attach metadata to a circuit
  for use in tracking the circuit. For example::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2, user_metadata_field_1='my_metadata',
                        user_metadata_field_2='my_other_value')

  or::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.metadata = {'user_metadata_field_1': 'my_metadata',
                   'user_metadata_field_2': 'my_other_value'}

  This metadata will **not** be used for influencing the execution of the
  circuit but is just used for tracking the circuit for the lifetime of the
  object. The ``metadata`` attribute will persist between any circuit
  transforms including :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble`. The expectation is for providers to
  associate the metadata in the result it returns, so that users can
  filter results based on circuit metadata the same way they can currently
  do with ``QuantumCircuit.name``.

- Add a new operator class :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.CNOTDihedral` has
  been added to the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. This class is
  used to represent the CNOT-Dihedral group, which is generated by the
  quantum gates :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.TGate`,
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XGate`.

- Adds a ``&`` (``__and__``) binary operator to ``BaseOperator`` subclasses
  (eg :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`) in the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. This is shorthand to call the
  classes :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` method
  (ie ``A & B == A.compose(B)``).

  For example:

  .. code:: python

    import qiskit.quantum_info as qi

    qi.Pauli('X') & qi.Pauli('Y')

- Adds a ``&`` (``__and__``) binary operator to
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes. This is shorthand to
  call the classes :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.evolve` method
  (ie ``psi & U == psi.evolve(U)``).

  For example:

  .. code:: python

    import qiskit.quantum_info as qi

    qi.Statevector.from_label('0') & qi.Pauli('X')

- A new a new 2-qubit gate, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ECRGate`,
  the echo cross-resonance (ECR), has been added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module along with a corresponding method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ecr` for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. The ECR gate is two
  :math:`CR(\frac{}{4})` pulses with an
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XGate` between them for the echo. This gate
  is locally equivalent to a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate` (can
  convert to a CNOT with local pre- or post-rotation). It is the native gate
  on current IBM hardware and compiling to it allows the pre-/post-rotations
  to be merged into the rest of the circuit.

- A new kwarg ``approximation_degree`` has been added to the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function for enabling
  approximate compilation. Valid values range from 0 to 1, and higher
  means less approximation. This is a heuristic dial
  to experiment with circuit approximations. The concrete interpretation
  of this number is left to each pass, which may use it to perform
  some approximate version of the pass. Specific examples include
  the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis` pass or the
  or translators to discrete gate sets. If a pass does not support this
  option, it implies exact transformation.

- Two new transpiler passess, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.GateDirection`
  and :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckGateDirection`, were added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module. These new passes are inteded to
  be more general replacements for
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CXDirection` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckCXDirection` (which are both now
  deprecated, see the deprecation notes for more details) that perform the
  same function but work with other gates beside just
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate`.

- When running on Windows, parallel execution with the
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` function can now be enabled (it is
  still disabled by default). To do this you can either set
  ``parallel = True`` in a user config file, or set the ``QISKIT_PARALLEL``
  environment variable to ``TRUE`` (this will also effect
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble`
  which both use :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` internally). It is
  important to note that when enabling parallelism on Windows there are
  limitations around how Python launches processes for Windows, see the
  Known Issues section below for more details on the limitations with
  parallel execution on Windows.

- A new function, :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.hellinger_distance`, for
  computing the Hellinger distance between two counts distributions has
  been added to the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module.

- The :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.decompose_clifford` function in the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module (which gets used internally by the
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford.to_circuit` method) has a new kwarg
  ``method`` which enables selecting the synthesis method used by either
  setting it to ``'AG'`` or ``'greedy'``. By default for more than three
  qubits it is set to ``'greedy'`` which uses a non-optimal greedy compilation
  routine for Clifford elements synthesis, by Bravyi et. al., which typically
  yields better CX cost compared to the previously used Aaronson-Gottesman
  method (for more than two qubits). You can use the ``method`` kwarg to revert
  to the previous default Aaronson-Gottesman method by setting ``method='AG'``.

- The :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.extensions` module can now be constructed using an integer.
  The '1' bits of the integer will insert a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Reset`
  and an :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XGate` into the circuit for the
  corresponding qubit. This will be done using the standard little-endian
  convention is qiskit, ie the rightmost bit of the integer will set qubit
  0. For example, setting the parameter in
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize` equal to ``5`` will set qubits 0
  and 2 to value 1.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.extensions import Initialize

      initialize = Initialize(13)
      initialize.definition.draw('mpl')

- The :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.extensions` module now supports constructing directly from
  a Pauli label (analogous to the
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.from_label` method). The Pauli label
  refer to basis states of the Pauli eigenstates Z, X, Y. These labels use
  Qiskit's standard little-endian notation, for example a label of ``'01'``
  would initialize qubit 0 to :math:`|1\rangle` and qubit 1 to
  :math:`|0\rangle`.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.extensions import Initialize

      initialize = Initialize("10+-lr")
      initialize.definition.draw('mpl')

- The kwarg, ``template_list``, for the constructor of the
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization` transpiler pass
  now supports taking in a list of both
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` objects. Previously, only
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` were accepted (which were internally
  converted to :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` objects) in the
  input list.

- A new transpiler pass,
  :py:class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilder`, capable
  of generating calibrations and adding them to a quantum circuit has been
  introduced. This pass takes calibrated
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate` objects and creates the
  calibrations for :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.RZXGate` objects with an
  arbitrary rotation angle. The schedules are created by stretching and
  compressing the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.GaussianSquare` pulses of the
  echoed-cross resonance gates.

- New template circuits for using :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.RZXGate`
  are added to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module (eg
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.rzx_yz`). This enables pairing
  the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization` pass with the
  :py:class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.RZXCalibrationBuilder` pass to
  automatically find and replace gate sequences, such as
  ``CNOT - P(theta) - CNOT``, with more efficent circuits based on
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.RZXGate` with a calibration.

- The matplotlib output type for the
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` and
  the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class now supports configuration
  files for setting the visualization style. In previous releases, there was
  basic functionality that allowed users to pass in a ``style`` kwarg that
  took in a ``dict`` to customize the colors and other display features of
  the ``mpl`` drawer. This has now been expanded so that these dictionaries
  can be loaded from JSON files directly without needing to pass a dictionary.
  This enables users to create new style files and use that style for
  visualizations by passing the style filename as a string to the ``style``
  kwarg.

  To leverage this feature you must set the ``circuit_mpl_style_path``
  option in a user config file. This option should be set to the path you
  want qiskit to search for style JSON files. If specifying multiple path
  entries they should be separated by ``:``. For example, setting
  ``circuit_mpl_style_path = ~/.qiskit:~/user_styles`` in a user config
  file will look for JSON files in both ``~/.qiskit`` and ``~/user_styles``.

- A new kwarg, ``format_marginal`` has been added to the function
  :func:`~qiskit.result.utils.marginal_counts` which when set to ``True``
  formats the counts output according to the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cregs` in the circuit and missing
  indices are represented with a ``_``. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, execute, BasicAer, result
      from qiskit.result.utils import marginal_counts
      qc = QuantumCircuit(5, 5)
      qc.x(0)
      qc.measure(0, 0)

      result = execute(qc, BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator')).result()
      print(marginal_counts(result.get_counts(), [0, 2, 4], format_marginal=True))

- Improved the performance of
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.expectation_value`  and
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.expectation_value` when the
  argument operator is a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli`  or
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`  operator.

- The user config file has 2 new configuration options, ``num_processes`` and
  ``parallel``, which are used to control the default behavior of
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map`. The ``parallel`` option is a boolean
  that is used to dictate whether :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` will
  run in multiple processes or not. If it set to ``False`` calls to
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` will be executed serially, while setting
  it to ``True`` will enable parallel execution. The ``num_processes`` option
  takes an integer which sets how many CPUs to use when executing in parallel.
  By default it will use the number of CPU cores on a system.

- There are 2 new environment variables, ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` and
  ``QISKIT_NUM_PROCS``, that can be used to control the default behavior of
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map`. The ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` option can be
  set to the ``TRUE`` (any capitalization) to set the default to run in
  multiple processes when :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` is called. If it
  is set to any other
  value :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` will be executed serially.
  ``QISKIT_NUM_PROCS`` takes an integer (for example ``QISKIT_NUM_PROCS=5``)
  which will be used as the default number of processes to run with. Both
  of these will take precedence over the equivalent option set in the user
  config file.

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression.gradient`, has
  been added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` class. This
  method is used to  evaluate the gradient of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` object.

- The ``__eq__`` method (ie what is called when the ``==`` operator is used)
  for the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` now allows for the
  comparison with a numeric value. Previously, it was only possible
  to compare two instances of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` with ``==``. For example::

      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

      x = Parameter("x")
      y = x + 2
      y = y.assign(x, -1)

      assert y == 1

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliFeatureMap` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module now supports adjusting the rotational
  factor, :math:`\alpha`, by either setting using the kwarg ``alpha`` on
  the constructor or setting the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliFeatureMap.alpha` attribute after
  creation. Previously this value was fixed at ``2.0``. Adjusting this
  attribute allows for better control of decision boundaries and provides
  additional flexibility handling the input features without needing
  to explicitly scale them in the data set.

- A new :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` class,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliGate`, has been added
  the :class:`qiskit.circuit.library` module and corresponding method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.pauli`,  was added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This new gate class enables
  applying several individual pauli gates to different qubits at the
  simultaneously. This is primarily useful for simulators which can use this
  new gate to more efficiently implement multiple simultaneous Pauli gates.

- Improve the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` operator.
  This class now represents and element from the full N-qubit Pauli group
  including complex coefficients. It now supports the Operator API methods
  including :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.compose`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.dot`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.tensor` etc, where compose and dot are
  defined with respect to the full Pauli group.

  This class also allows conversion to and from the string representation
  of Pauli's for convenience.

  For example

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Pauli

    P1 = Pauli('XYZ')
    P2 = Pauli('YZX')
    P1.dot(P2)

  Pauli's can also be directly appended to
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Pauli

    circ = QuantumCircuit(3)
    circ.append(Pauli('XYZ'), [0, 1, 2])
    circ.draw(output='mpl')

  Additional methods allow computing when two Pauli's commute (using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.commutes` method) or anticommute
  (using the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.anticommutes` method), and
  computing the Pauli resulting from Clifford conjugation
  :math:`P^\prime = C.P.C^\dagger`
  using the  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.evolve` method.

  See the API documentation of the :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` class
  for additional information.

- A new function, :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.random_pauli`, for generating a
  random element of the N-qubit Pauli group has been added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module.

- A new class,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewisePolynomialPauliRotations`, has
  been added to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module. This circuit library
  element is used for mapping a piecewise polynomial function, :math:`f(x)`,
  which is defined through breakpoints and coefficients, on qubit amplitudes.
  The breakpoints :math:`(x_0, ..., x_J)` are a subset of :math:`[0, 2^n-1]`,
  where :math:`n` is the number of state qubits. The corresponding
  coefficients :math:`[a_{j,1},...,a_{j,d}]`, where :math:`d` is the highest
  degree among all polynomials. Then :math:`f(x)` is defined as:

  .. math::

      f(x) = \begin{cases}
          0, x < x_0 \\
          \sum_{i=0}^{i=d}a_{j,i} x^i, x_j \leq x < x_{j+1}
          \end{cases}

  where we implicitly assume :math:`x_{J+1} = 2^n`. And the mapping applied
  to the amplitudes is given by

  .. math::

      F|x\rangle |0\rangle = \cos(p_j(x))|x\rangle |0\rangle + \sin(p_j(x))|x\rangle |1\rangle

  This mapping is based on controlled Pauli Y-rotations and constructed using
  the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations`.

- A new module :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` has been introduced. This module
  contains functionality equivalent to what has previously been
  provided by the :mod:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms` module (which is now
  deprecated) and provides the building blocks for constructing quantum
  algorithms. For details on migrating from ``qiskit-aqua`` to this new
  module please refer to the migration guide :ref:`aqua-migration`

- A new module :mod:`qiskit.opflow` has been introduced. This module
  contains functionality equivalent to what has previously been
  provided by the :mod:`qiskit.aqua.operators` module (which is now
  deprecated) and provides the operators and state functions which are
  used to build quantum algorithms. For details on migrating from
  ``qiskit-aqua`` to this new module please refer to the migration guide
  :ref:`aqua-migration`

- This is the first release that includes precompiled binary wheels for
  the for Linux aarch64 systems. If you are running a manylinux2014
  compatible aarch64 Linux system there are now precompiled wheels available
  on PyPI, you are no longer required to build from source to install
  qiskit-terra.

- The :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity` function is now able to be
  used with a non-unitary target channel. In this case the returned value is
  equivalent to the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.state_fidelity` of the
  normalized :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Choi` matrices for the channels.

  Note that the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.average_gate_fidelity` and
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.gate_error` functions still require the target
  channel to be unitary and will raise an exception if it is not.

- Added a new pulse builder function, :func:`qiskit.pulse.macro`.
  This enables normal Python functions to be decorated as macros.
  This enables pulse builder functions to be used within the decorated
  function. The builder macro can then be called from within a pulse
  building context, enabling code reuse.

  For Example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit import pulse

      @pulse.macro
      def measure(qubit: int):
          pulse.play(pulse.GaussianSquare(16384, 256, 15872),
                     pulse.MeasureChannel(qubit))
          mem_slot = pulse.MemorySlot(0)
          pulse.acquire(16384, pulse.AcquireChannel(0), mem_slot)
          return mem_slot

      with pulse.build(backend=backend) as sched:
          mem_slot = measure(0)
          print(f"Qubit measured into {mem_slot}")

      sched.draw()

- A new class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliTwoDesign`, was added
  to the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` which implements a particular form
  of a 2-design circuit from https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.11173.pdf
  For instance, this circuit can look like:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit.library import PauliTwoDesign
    circuit = PauliTwoDesign(4, reps=2, seed=5, insert_barriers=True)
    circuit.decompose().draw(output='mpl')

- A new pulse drawer :func:`qiskit.visualization.pulse_v2.draw`
  (which is aliased as ``qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer_v2``) is now
  available. This new pulse drawer supports multiple new features not
  present in the original pulse drawer
  (:func:`~qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer`).

  * Truncation of long pulse instructions.
  * Visualization of parametric pulses.
  * New stylesheets ``IQXStandard``, ``IQXSimple``, ``IQXDebugging``.
  * Visualization of system info (channel frequency, etc...) by specifying
    :class:`qiskit.providers.Backend` objects for visualization.
  * Specifying ``axis`` objects for plotting to allow further extension of
    generated plots, i.e., for publication manipulations.

  New stylesheets can take callback functions that dynamically modify the apperance of
  the output image, for example, reassembling a collection of channels,
  showing details of instructions, updating appearance of pulse envelopes, etc...
  You can create custom callback functions and feed them into a stylesheet instance to
  modify the figure appearance without modifying the drawer code.
  See pulse drawer module docstrings for details.

  Note that file saving is now delegated to Matplotlib.
  To save image files, you need to call ``savefig`` method with returned ``Figure`` object.

- Adds a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.reverse_qargs` method to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes. This method reverses
  the order of subsystems in the states and is equivalent to the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` method for N-qubit
  states. For example:

    .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import QFT
      from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

      circ = QFT(3)

      state1 = Statevector.from_instruction(circ)
      state2 = Statevector.from_instruction(circ.reverse_bits())

      state1.reverse_qargs() == state2

- Adds a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.reverse_qargs` method to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` class. This method reverses
  the order of subsystems in the operator and is equivalent to the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` method for N-qubit
  operators. For example:

    .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import QFT
      from qiskit.quantum_info import Operator

      circ = QFT(3)

      op1 = Operator(circ)
      op2 = Operator(circ.reverse_bits())

      op1.reverse_qargs() == op2

- The ``latex`` output method for the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method now will use a
  user defined label on gates in the output visualization. For example::

    import math

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.rx(math.pi/2, 0, label='My Special Rotation')

    qc.draw(output='latex')

- The ``routing_method`` kwarg for the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`
  function now accepts a new option, ``'none'``. When
  ``routing_method='none'`` no routing pass will be run as part of the
  transpilation. If the circuit does not fit coupling map a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.exceptions.TranspilerError` exception will be
  raised.

- A new gate class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RVGate`, was added to
  the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module along with the corresponding
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.rv`. The
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RVGate` is a general rotation gate, similar
  to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate`, but instead of specifying
  Euler angles the three components of a rotation vector are specified where
  the direction of the vector specifies the rotation axis and the magnitude
  specifies the rotation angle about the axis in radians. For example::

    import math

    import np

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
    theta = math.pi / 5
    phi = math.pi / 3
    # RGate axis:
    axis = np.array([math.cos(phi), math.sin(phi)])
    rotation_vector = theta * axis
    qc.rv(*rotation_vector, 0)

- Unbound :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects used in a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object will now be sorted
  by name. This will take effect for the parameters returned by the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` attribute. Additionally,
  the :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters` methods can now take
  in a list of a values which will bind/assign them to the parameters in
  name-sorted order. Previously these methods would only take a dictionary of
  parameters and values. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Parameter

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
    circuit.rx(Parameter('x'), 0)
    circuit.ry(Parameter('y'), 0)

    print(circuit.parameters)

    bound = circuit.bind_parameters([1, 2])
    bound.draw(output='mpl')

- The constructors for the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes can now take a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object in to build a
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` object from that circuit,
  assuming that the qubits are initialized in :math:`|0\rangle`. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)

    statevector = Statevector(qc)
    statevector.draw(output='latex')

- New fake backend classes are available under ``qiskit.test.mock``. These
  included mocked versions of ``ibmq_casablanca``, ``ibmq_sydney``,
  ``ibmq_mumbai``, ``ibmq_lima``, ``ibmq_belem``, ``ibmq_quito``. As
  with the other fake backends, these include snapshots of calibration data
  (i.e. ``backend.defaults()``) and error data (i.e. ``backend.properties()``)
  taken from the real system, and can be used for local testing, compilation
  and simulation.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- Attempting to add an :class:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction` object
  with a parameterized ``duration`` (ie the value of ``duration`` is
  an unbound :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` object) to a
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` is not supported. Attempting to do
  so will result in ``UnassignedDurationError``
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.PulseError` being raised. This is a limitation of
  how the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction` overlap constraints are
  evaluated currently. This is supported by :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock`,
  in which the overlap constraints are evaluated just before the execution.

- On Windows systems when parallel execution is enabled for
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` parallelism may not work when called
  from a script running outside of a ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` block.
  This is due to how Python launches parallel processes on Windows. If a
  ``RuntimeError`` or ``AttributeError`` are raised by scripts that call
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` (including using functions that use
  ``parallel_map()`` internally like :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`)
  with Windows and parallelism enabled you can try embedding the script
  calls inside ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` to workaround the issue.
  For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QiskitError
    from qiskit import execute, Aer

    qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
    qc1.h(0)
    qc1.cx(0, 1)
    qc1.measure([0,1], [0,1])
    # making another circuit: superpositions
    qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
    qc2.h([0,1])
    qc2.measure([0,1], [0,1])
    execute([qc1, qc2], Aer.get_backend('qasm_simulator'))

  should be changed to::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QiskitError
    from qiskit import execute, Aer

    def main():
        qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
        qc1.h(0)
        qc1.cx(0, 1)
        qc1.measure([0,1], [0,1])
        # making another circuit: superpositions
        qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
        qc2.h([0,1])
        qc2.measure([0,1], [0,1])
        execute([qc1, qc2], Aer.get_backend('qasm_simulator'))

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

  if any errors are encountered with parallelism on Windows.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The preset pass managers
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_1_pass_manager`,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_2_pass_manager`,
  and :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_3_pass_manager`
  (which are used for ``optimization_level`` 1, 2, and 3 in the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and
  :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` functions) now unconditionally
  use the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`
  pass for 1 qubit gate optimization. Previously, these pass managers would
  use the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGates` pass if the basis
  gates contained ``u1``, ``u2``, or ``u3``. If you want to still use
  the old :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGates` you will need
  to construct a custom :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` with the
  pass.

- Following transpilation of a parameterized
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`, the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` attribute of output
  circuit may no longer be returned in a simplified form, if the global phase
  is a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression`.

  For example::

    qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
    theta = Parameter('theta')

    qc.rz(theta, 0)
    qc.rz(-theta, 0)

    print(transpile(qc, basis_gates=['p']).global_phase)

  previously returned ``0``, but will now return ``-0.5*theta + 0.5*theta``.
  This change was necessary was to avoid a large runtime performance
  penalty as simplifying symbolic expressions can be quite slow, especially
  if there are many :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` objects
  in a circuit.

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.BasicAerJob` job objects returned
  from BasicAer backends are now synchronous instances of
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.JobV1`. This means that calls to
  the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy.run` will block
  until the simulation finishes executing. If you want to restore the
  previous async behavior you'll need to wrap the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy.run` with something that
  will run in a seperate thread or process like ``futures.ThreadPoolExecutor``
  or ``futures.ProcessPoolExecutor``.

- The ``allow_sample_measuring`` option for the
  BasicAer simulator :class:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy` has
  changed from a default of ``False`` to ``True``. This was done to better
  reflect the actual default behavior of the simulator, which would use
  sample measuring if the input circuit supported it (even if it was not
  enabled). If you are running a circuit that doesn't support sample
  measurement (ie it has :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Reset` operations or if
  there are operations after a measurement on a qubit) you should make sure
  to explicitly set this option to ``False`` when you call
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy.run`.

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CommutativeCancellation` transpiler
  pass is now aware of the target basis gates, which means it will only
  use gates in the specified basis. Previously, the pass would unconditionally
  replace consecutive gates which commute with
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZGate` with the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U1Gate`. However, now that the pass is
  basis aware and has a kwarg, ``basis_gates``, for specifying the target
  basis there is a potential change in behavior if the kwarg is not set.
  When the ``basis_gates`` kwarg is not used and there are no variable
  z-rotation gates in the circuit then no commutative cancellation will occur.

- :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` (which is the parent class for
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` (which is the parent class for
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit` and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit`) objects
  are now immutable. In previous releases it was possible to adjust the value
  of a :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister.size` or
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister.name` attributes of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` object and the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit.index` or
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit.register` attributes of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` object after it was initially
  created. However this would lead to unsound behavior that would corrupt
  container structure that rely on a hash (such as a `dict`) since these
  attributes are treated as immutable properties of a register or bit (see
  `#4705 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4705>`__ for more
  details). To avoid this unsound behavior this attributes of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` are
  no longer settable after initial creation. If you were previously adjusting
  the objects at runtime you will now need to create a new ``Register``
  or ``Bit`` object with the new values.

- The ``DAGCircuit.__eq__`` method (which is used by the ``==`` operator),
  which is used to check structural equality of
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` instances, will now
  include the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` and
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.calibrations` attributes in the
  fields checked for equality. This means that circuits which would have
  evaluated as equal in prior releases may not anymore if the
  ``global_phase`` or ``calibrations`` differ between the circuits. For
  example, in previous releases this would return ``True``::

    import math

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc1 = QuantumCircuit(1)
    qc1.x(0)

    qc2 = QuantumCircuit(1, global_phase=math.pi)
    qc2.x(0)

    print(qc2 == qc1)

  However, now because the ``global_phase`` attribute of the circuits differ
  this will now return ``False``.

- The previously deprecated ``qubits()`` and ``clbits()`` methods on the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class, which were deprecated in the
  0.15.0 Terra release, have been removed. Instead you should use the
  :attr:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.qubits` and
  :attr:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.clbits` attributes of the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class. For example, if you were
  running::

    from qiskit.dagcircuit import DAGCircuit

    dag = DAGCircuit()
    qubits = dag.qubits()

  That would be replaced by::

    from qiskit.dagcircuit import DAGCircuit

    dag = DAGCircuit()
    qubits = dag.qubits

- The :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` returned by the fake
  pulse backends :py:class:`qiskit.test.mock.FakeOpenPulse2Q` and
  :py:class:`qiskit.test.mock.FakeOpenPulse3Q` have been updated to have
  more realistic pulse sequence definitions. If you are using these fake
  backend classes you may need to update your usage because of these changes.

- The default synthesis method used by
  :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.decompose_clifford` function in the
  :mod:`~qiskit.quantum_info` module (which gets used internally by the
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford.to_circuit` method) for more than
  3 qubits now uses a non-optimal greedy compilation routine for Clifford
  elements synthesis, by Bravyi et. al., which typically yields better CX
  cost compared to the old default. If you need to revert to the previous
  Aaronson-Gottesman method this can be done by setting ``method='AG'``.

- The previously deprecated module ``qiskit.visualization.interactive``,
  which was deprecated in the 0.15.0 release, has now been removed. Instead
  you should use the matplotlib based visualizations:

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Removed Interactive function
      - Equivalent matplotlib function
    * - ``iplot_bloch_multivector``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_multivector`
    * - ``iplot_state_city``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_state_city`
    * - ``iplot_state_qsphere``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere`
    * - ``iplot_state_hinton``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_state_hinton`
    * - ``iplot_histogram``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram`
    * - ``iplot_state_paulivec``
      - :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_state_paulivec`

- The ``qiskit.Aer`` and ``qiskit.IBMQ`` top level attributes are now lazy
  loaded. This means that the objects will now always exist and warnings will
  no longer be raised on import if ``qiskit-aer`` or ``qiskit-ibmq-provider``
  are not installed (or can't be found by Python). If you were checking for
  the presence of ``qiskit-aer`` or ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` using these
  module attributes and explicitly comparing to ``None`` or looking for the
  absence of the attribute this no longer will work because they are always
  defined as an object now. In other words running something like::

      try:
          from qiskit import Aer
      except ImportError:
          print("Aer not available")

      or::

      try:
          from qiskit import IBMQ
      except ImportError:
          print("IBMQ not available")

  will no longer work. Instead to determine if those providers are present
  you can either explicitly use ``qiskit.providers.aer.Aer`` and
  ``qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQ``::

      try:
          from qiskit.providers.aer import Aer
      except ImportError:
          print("Aer not available")

      try:
          from qiskit.providers.ibmq import IBMQ
      except ImportError:
          print("IBMQ not available")

  or check ``bool(qiskit.Aer)`` and ``bool(qiskit.IBMQ)`` instead, for
  example::

      import qiskit

      if not qiskit.Aer:
          print("Aer not available")
      if not qiskit.IBMQ:
          print("IBMQ not available")

  This change was necessary to avoid potential import cycle issues between
  the qiskit packages and also to improve the import time when Aer or IBMQ
  are not being used.

- The user config file option ``suppress_packaging_warnings`` option in the
  user config file and the ``QISKIT_SUPPRESS_PACKAGING_WARNINGS`` environment
  variable no longer has any effect and will be silently ignored. The warnings
  this option controlled have been removed and will no longer be emitted at
  import time from the ``qiskit`` module.

- The previously deprecated ``condition`` kwarg for
  :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` constructor has been removed.
  It was deprecated in the 0.15.0 release. Instead you should now be setting
  the classical condition on the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` object
  passed into the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` constructor when
  creating a new ``op`` node.

- When creating a new :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` (which is the parent
  class for :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister`) or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object with a number of bits (eg
  ``QuantumCircuit(2)``), it is now required that number of bits are
  specified as an integer or another type which is castable to unambiguous
  integers(e.g. ``2.0``). Non-integer values will now raise an error as the
  intent in those cases was unclear (you can't have fractional bits). For
  more information on why this was changed refer to:
  `#4855 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4855>`__

- `networkx <https://networkx.org/>`__ is no longer a requirement for
  qiskit-terra. All the networkx usage inside qiskit-terra has been removed
  with the exception of 3 methods:

  * :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.to_networkx`
  * :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.from_networkx`
  * :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency.to_networkx`

  If you are using any of these methods you will need to manually install
  networkx in your environment to continue using them.

- By default on macOS with Python >=3.8 :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map`
  will no longer run in multiple processes. This is a change from previous
  releases where the default behavior was that
  :func:`~qiskit.tools.parallel_map` would launch multiple processes. This
  change was made because with newer versions of macOS with Python 3.8 and
  3.9 multiprocessing is either unreliable or adds significant overhead
  because of the change in Python 3.8 to launch new processes with ``spawn``
  instead of ``fork``. To re-enable parallel execution on macOS with
  Python >= 3.8 you can use the user config file ``parallel`` option or set
  the environment variable ``QISKIT_PARALLEL`` to ``True``.

- The previously deprecated kwarg ``callback`` on the constructor for the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` class has been removed. This
  kwarg has been deprecated since the 0.13.0 release (April, 9th 2020).
  Instead you can pass the ``callback`` kwarg to the
  :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run` method directly. For example,
  if you were using::

    from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
    from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

    qc = random_circuit(2, 2)

    def callback(**kwargs)
      print(kwargs['pass_'])

    pm = PassManager(callback=callback)
    pm.run(qc)

  this can be replaced with::

    from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
    from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

    qc = random_circuit(2, 2)

    def callback(**kwargs)
      print(kwargs['pass_'])

    pm = PassManager()
    pm.run(qc, callback=callback)

- It is now no longer possible to instantiate a base channel without
  a prefix, such as :class:`qiskit.pulse.Channel` or
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.PulseChannel`. These classes are designed to
  classify types of different user facing channel classes, such
  as :class:`qiskit.pulse.DriveChannel`, but do not have a definition as
  a target resource. If you were previously directly instantiating either
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Channel` or
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.PulseChannel`, this is no longer allowed. Please use
  the appropriate subclass.

- When the ``require_cp`` and/or ``require_tp`` kwargs of
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.average_gate_fidelity`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.gate_error` are ``True``, they will now only log a
  warning rather than the previous behavior of raising a
  :class:`~qiskit.exceptions.QiskitError` exception if the input channel is
  non-CP or non-TP respectively.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QFT` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module now computes the Fourier transform
  using a little-endian representation of tensors, i.e. the state
  :math:`|1\rangle` maps to :math:`|0\rangle - |1\rangle + |2\rangle - ..`
  assuming the computational basis correspond to little-endian bit ordering
  of the integers. :math:`|0\rangle = |000\rangle, |1\rangle = |001\rangle`,
  etc. This was done to make it more consistent with the rest of Qiskit,
  which uses a little-endian convention for bit order. If you were depending
  on the previous bit order you can use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QFT.reverse_bits` method to revert to the
  previous behavior. For example::

    from qiskit.circuit.library import QFT

    qft = QFT(5).reverse_bits()

- The ``qiskit.__qiskit_version__`` module attribute was previously a ``dict``
  will now return a custom read-only ``Mapping`` object that checks the
  version of qiskit elements at runtime instead of at import time. This was
  done to speed up the import path of qiskit and eliminate a possible import
  cycle by only importing the element packages at runtime if the version
  is needed from the package. This should be fully compatible with the
  ``dict`` previously return and for most normal use cases there will be no
  difference. However, if some applications were relying on either mutating
  the contents or explicitly type checking it may require updates to adapt to
  this change.

- The ``qiskit.execute`` module has been renamed to
  :mod:`qiskit.execute_function`. This was necessary to avoid a potentical
  name conflict between the :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` function
  which is re-exported as ``qiskit.execute``. ``qiskit.execute`` the function
  in some situations could conflict with ``qiskit.execute`` the module which
  would lead to a cryptic error because Python was treating ``qiskit.execute``
  as the module when the intent was to the function or vice versa. The module
  rename was necessary to avoid this conflict. If you're importing
  ``qiskit.execute`` to get the module (typical usage was
  ``from qiskit.execute import execute``) you will need to update this to
  use ``qiskit.execute_function`` instead. ``qiskit.execute`` will now always
  resolve to the function.

- The ``qiskit.compiler.transpile``, ``qiskit.compiler.assemble``,
  ``qiskit.compiler.schedule``, and ``qiskit.compiler.sequence`` modules have
  been renamed to ``qiskit.compiler.transpiler``,
  ``qiskit.compiler.assembler``, ``qiskit.compiler.scheduler``, and
  ``qiskit.compiler.sequence`` respectively. This was necessary to avoid a
  potentical name conflict between the modules and the re-exported function
  paths :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile`, :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble`,
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.schedule`, and :func:`qiskit.compiler.sequence`.
  In some situations this name conflict between the module path and
  re-exported function path would lead to a cryptic error because Python was
  treating an import as the module when the intent was to use the function or
  vice versa. The module rename was necessary to avoid this conflict. If
  you were using the imports to get the modules before (typical usage would
  be like``from qiskit.compiler.transpile import transpile``) you will need
  to update this to use the new module paths.
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile`, :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble`,
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.schedule`, and :func:`qiskit.compiler.sequence`
  will now always resolve to the functions.

- The :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Quaternion` class was moved from the
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.operator`` submodule to the
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis`` submodule to better reflect it's purpose.
  No change is required if you were importing it from the root
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module, but if you were importing from
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.operator`` you will need to update your import path.

- Removed the ``QuantumCircuit.mcmt`` method, which has been
  deprecated since the Qiskit Terra 0.14.0 release in April 2020.
  Instead of using the method, please use the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCMT` class instead to construct
  a multi-control multi-target gate and use the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.append` or
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` to add it to a circuit.

  For example, you can replace::

      circuit.mcmt(ZGate(), [0, 1, 2], [3, 4])

  with::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import MCMT
      mcmt = MCMT(ZGate(), 3, 2)
      circuit.compose(mcmt, range(5))

- Removed the ``QuantumCircuit.diag_gate`` method which has been deprecated since the
  Qiskit Terra 0.14.0 release in April 2020. Instead, use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.diagonal` method of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`.

- Removed the ``QuantumCircuit.ucy`` method which has been deprecated since the
  Qiskit Terra 0.14.0 release in April 2020. Instead, use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ucry` method of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`.

- The previously deprecated ``mirror()`` method for
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` has been removed. It was deprecated
  in the 0.15.0 release. The :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_ops`
  method should be used instead since mirroring could be confused with
  swapping the output qubits of the circuit. The ``reverse_ops()`` method
  only reverses the order of gates that are applied instead of mirroring.

- The previously deprecated support passing a float (for the ``scale`` kwarg
  as the first positional argument to the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` has been removed. It was
  deprecated in the 0.12.0 release. The first positional argument to the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method is now the ``output``
  kwarg which does not accept a float. Instead you should be using ``scale``
  as a named kwarg instead of using it positionally.

  For example, if you were previously calling ``draw`` with::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.draw(0.75, output='mpl')

  this would now need to be::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.draw(output='mpl', scale=0.75)

  or::

    qc.draw('mpl', scale=0.75)

- Features of Qiskit Pulse (:mod:`qiskit.pulse`) which were deprecated
  in the 0.15.0 release (August, 2020) have been removed. The full set
  of changes are:

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Module
      - Old
      - New
    * - ``qiskit.pulse.library``
      - ``SamplePulse``
      - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Waveform`
    * - ``qiskit.pulse.library``
      - ``ConstantPulse``
      - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Constant`
    * - (module rename)
      - ``pulse.pulse_lib`` Module
      - :mod:`qiskit.pulse.library`

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Class
      - Old method
      - New method
    * - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.ParametricPulse`
      - ``get_sample_pulse``
      - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.ParametricPulse.get_waveform`
    * - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction`
      - ``command``
      - N/A. Commands and Instructions have been unified.
        Use :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction.operands`
        to get information about the instruction data.
    * - :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire`
      - ``acquires``, ``mem_slots``, ``reg_slots``
      - :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.acquire`,
        :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.mem_slot`,
        :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.reg_slot`. (The
        :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire` instruction no
        longer broadcasts across multiple qubits.)

- The dictionary previously held on :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`
  edges has been removed. Instead, edges now hold the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` instance which had previously been included in
  the dictionary as its ``'wire'`` field. Note that the NetworkX graph
  returned by :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.to_networkx` will still
  have a dictionary for its edge attributes, but the ``'name'`` field will no
  longer be populated.

- The :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` attribute of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class no longer is returning a
  ``set``. Instead it returns a ``ParameterView`` object which implements
  all the methods that ``set`` offers (albeit deprecated). This was done
  to support a model that preserves name-sorted parameters. It
  should be fully compatible with any previous usage of the ``set`` returned
  by the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` attribute, except
  for where explicit type checking of a set was done.

- When running :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` on a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.delay` instructions, the units will
  be converted to dt if the value of dt (sample time) is known to
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`, either explicitly via the ``dt``
  kwarg or via the :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration` for
  a ``Backend`` object passed in via the ``backend`` kwarg.

- The interpretation of ``meas_map`` (which
  is an attribute of a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` object or
  as the corresponding ``meas_map`` kwarg on the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.schedule`, :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble`,
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.sequence`, or
  :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` functions) has been updated
  to better match the true constraints of the hardware. The format of this
  data is a list of lists, where the items in the inner list are integers
  specifying qubit labels. For instance::

      [[A, B, C], [D, E, F, G]]

  Previously, the ``meas_map`` constraint was interpreted such that
  if one qubit was acquired (e.g. A), then all other qubits sharing
  a subgroup with that qubit (B and C) would have to be acquired
  at the same time and for the same duration. This constraint has been
  relaxed. One acquisition does not require more acquisitions. (If A is
  acquired, B and C do **not** need to be acquired.) Instead, qubits in the
  same measurement group cannot be acquired in a partially overlapping way
  -- think of the ``meas_map`` as specifying a shared acquisition resource
  (If we acquire A from ``t=1000`` to ``t=2000``, we cannot acquire B
  starting from ``1000<t<2000``). For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      # Good
      meas_map = [[0, 1]]
      # Acquire a subset of [0, 1]
      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q0))

      # Acquire 0 and 1 together (same start time, same duration)
      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q0))
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q1))

      # Acquire 0 and 1 disjointly
      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q0))
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q1)) << 10

      # Acquisitions overlap, but 0 and 1 aren't in the same measurement
      # grouping
      meas_map = [[0], [1]]
      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q0))
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q1)) << 1

      # Bad: 0 and 1 are in the same grouping, but acquisitions
      # partially overlap
      meas_map = [[0, 1]]
      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q0))
      sched = sched.append(pulse.Acquire(10, acq_q1)) << 1


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Two new arguments have been added to
  :meth:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode.semantic_eq`, ``bit_indices1`` and
  ``bit_indices2``, which are expected to map the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` instances in each
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` to their index in ``qubits`` or
  ``clbits`` list of their respective
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`. During the deprecation period,
  these arguments are optional and when **not** specified the mappings will
  be automatically constructed based on the ``register`` and ``index``
  properties of each :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` instance. However, in a
  future release, they will be required arguments and the mapping will need
  to be supplied by the user.

- The :mod:`~qiskit.pulse` builder functions:

  * :py:func:`qiskit.pulse.call_circuit`
  * :py:func:`qiskit.pulse.call_schedule`

  are deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  These functions are unified into :py:func:`qiskit.pulse.call` which should
  be used instead.

- The :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` method
  :py:meth:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule.flatten` method is deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead you can use the
  :py:func:`qiskit.pulse.transforms.flatten` function which will perform
  the same operation.

- The :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.channels.Channel.assign_parameters` for the
  following classes:

   * :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.channels.Channel`,
   * :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.library.Pulse`,
   * :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction`,

  and all their subclasses is now deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. This functionality has been subsumed
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock` which is the future direction for
  constructing parameterized pulse programs.

- The :attr:`~qiskit.pulse.channels.Channel.parameters` attribute for
  the following clasess:

    * :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.channels.Channel`
    * :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction`.

  is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. This functionality
  has been subsumed :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.ScheduleBlock` which is the
  future direction for constructing parameterized pulse programs.

- Python 3.6 support has been deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. When support is removed you will need to upgrade the Python
  version you're using to Python 3.7 or above.

- Two :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.combine` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.extend` along with their corresponding
  Python operators ``+`` and ``+=`` are deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Instead the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` should be used.
  The :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` method allows more
  flexibility in composing two circuits that do not have matching registers.
  It does not, however, automatically add qubits/clbits unlike the deprecated
  methods. To add a circuit on new qubits/clbits, the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.tensor` method can be used. For
  example::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumRegister, QuantumCircuit

      a = QuantumRegister(2, 'a')
      circuit_a = QuantumCircuit(a)
      circuit_a.cx(0, 1)

      b = QuantumRegister(2, 'b')
      circuit_b = QuantumCircuit(b)
      circuit_b.cz(0, 1)

      # same as circuit_a + circuit_b (or combine)
      added_with_different_regs = circuit_b.tensor(circuit_a)

      # same as circuit_a + circuit_a (or combine)
      added_with_same_regs = circuit_a.compose(circuit_a)

      # same as circuit_a += circuit_b (or extend)
      circuit_a = circuit_b.tensor(circuit_a)

      # same as circuit_a += circuit_a (or extend)
      circuit_a.compose(circuit_a, inplace=True)

- Support for passing :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit` instances to the
  ``qubits`` kwarg of the :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.InstructionDurations.get`
  method has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  Instead, you should call the
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.InstructionDurations.get` method with the integer
  indices of the desired qubits.

- Using ``@`` (``__matmul__``) for invoking the ``compose`` method
  of ``BaseOperator`` subclasses (eg :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`)
  is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. The
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` method can be used directly or
  also invoked using the ``&`` (``__and__``) operator.

- Using ``*`` (``__mul__``) for calling the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` method of ``BaseOperator``
  subclasses (eg :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`) is deprecated and
  will be removed in a future release. Instead you can just call the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` directly.

- Using ``@`` (``__matmul__``) for invoking the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.evolve` method
  of the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes is deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release.. The ``evolve`` method can be used directly
  or also invoked using the ``&`` (``__and__``) operator.

- The ``qiskit.pulse.schedule.ParameterizedSchedule`` class has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you can
  directly parameterize pulse :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` objects with
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` object, for example::

    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    from qiskit.pulse import Schedule
    from qiskit.pulse import ShiftPhase, DriveChannel

    theta = Parameter('theta')
    target_schedule = Schedule()
    target_schedule.insert(0, ShiftPhase(theta, DriveChannel(0)), inplace=True)

- The :class:`qiskit.pulse.ScheduleComponent` class in the
  :mod:`qiskit.pulse` module has been deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Its usage should be replaced either using a
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` or :class:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction`
  directly. Additionally, the primary purpose of the ``ScheduleComponent``
  class was as a common base class for both :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`
  and :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction` for any place that was explicitly
  type checking or documenting accepting a ``ScheduleComponent`` input
  should be updated to accept :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction` or
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`.

- The JSON Schema files and usage for the IBMQ API payloads are deprecated
  and will be removed in a future release. This includes everything under
  the :mod:`qiskit.schemas` module and the :mod:`qiskit.validation` module.
  This also includes the ``validate`` kwargs for
  :meth:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj.to_dict` and
  :meth:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj.to_dict` along with the module level
  fastjsonschema validators in :mod:`qiskit.qobj` (which do not raise a
  deprecation warning). The schema files have been moved
  to the `Qiskit/ibmq-schemas <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibmq-schemas>`__
  repository and those should be treated as the canonical versions of the
  API schemas. Moving forward only those schemas will recieve updates and
  will be used as the source of truth for the schemas. If you were relying
  on the schemas bundled in qiskit-terra you should update to
  use that repository instead.

- The :mod:`qiskit.util` module has been deprecated and will be removed
  in a future release. It has been replaced by :mod:`qiskit.utils` which
  provides  the same functionality and will be expanded in the future. Note
  that no ``DeprecationWarning`` will be emitted regarding this deprecation
  since it was not feasible on Python 3.6.

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CXDirection` transpiler pass in the
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. Instead the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.GateDirection` should be used. It behaves
  identically to the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CXDirection` except
  that it now also supports transforming a circuit with
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ECRGate` gates in addition to
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate` gates.

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckCXDirection` transpiler pass in
  the :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` module has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. Instead the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CheckGateDirection` pass should be used.
  It behaves identically to the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CheckCXDirection` except
  that it now also supports checking the direction of all 2-qubit gates, not
  just :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CXGate` gates.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder.num_ancilla_qubits` is
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. It has been replaced
  with the :attr:`qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder.num_ancillas` attribute
  which is consistent with other circuit libraries' APIs.

- The following legacy methods of the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli` class
  have been deprecated. See the method documentation for replacement use in
  the updated Pauli class.

  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.from_label`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.sgn_prod`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.to_spmatrix`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.kron`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.update_z`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.update_x`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.insert_paulis`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.append_paulis`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.delete_qubits`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.pauli_single`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.random`

- Using a ``list`` or ``numpy.ndarray`` as the ``channel`` or ``target``
  argument for the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.average_gate_fidelity`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.gate_error`, and
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.diamond_norm` functions has been
  deprecated and will not be supported in a future release. The inputs should
  instead be a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` or a ``BaseOperator`` subclass
  object (eg. :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Choi`, etc.)

- Accessing references from :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Clbit` instances to their containing registers
  via the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit.register` or
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit.index` properties has been deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register`
  objects can be queried to find the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Bit` objects
  they contain.

- The current functionality of the :func:`qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer`
  function is deprecated and will be replaced by
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer_v2` (which is not backwards
  compatible) in a future release.

- The use of methods inherited from the ``set`` type on the output of the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` attribute (which used to
  be a ``set``) of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class are
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. This includes the
  methods from the ``add()``, ``difference()``, ``difference_update()``,
  ``discard()``, ``intersection()``, ``intersection_update()``,
  ``issubset()``, ``issuperset()``, ``symmetric_difference()``,
  ``symmetric_difference_update()``, ``union()``, ``update()``,
  ``__isub__()`` (which is the ``-=`` operator), and ``__ixor__()`` (which is
  the ``^=`` operator).

- The name of the first (and only) positional argument for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters` method has changed
  from ``value_dict`` to ``values``. The passing an argument in with the
  name ``values_dict`` is deprecated and will be removed in future release.
  For example, if you were previously calling
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters` with a call like:
  ``bind_parameters(values_dict={})`` this is deprecated and should be
  replaced by ``bind_parameters(values={})`` or even better just pass the
  argument positionally ``bind_parameters({})``.

- The name of the first (and only) positional argument for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters` method has changed
  from ``param_dict`` to ``parameters``. Passing an argument in with the name
  ``param_dict`` is deprecated and will be removed in future release. For
  example, if you were previously calling
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters` with a call like:
  ``assign_parameters(param_dict={})`` this is deprecated and should be
  replaced by ``assign_parameters(values={})`` or even better just pass the
  argument positionally ``assign_parameters({})``.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue where the :func:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` function
  would raise :class:`~qiskit.exceptions.QiskitError` exception when a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterVector` object was passed in for the
  ``parameter_bind`` kwarg. parameter. For example, it is now possible to
  call something like::

    execute(circuit, backend, parameter_binds=[{pv1: [...], pv2: [...]}])

  where ``pv1`` and ``pv2`` are :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterVector`
  objects.
  Fixed `#5467 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5467>`__

- Fixed an issue with the labels of parametric pulses in the
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjInstruction` class were not being properly
  set as they are with sampled pulses. This also means that pulse names
  that are imported from the :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults`
  returned by a :class:`~qiskit.providers.Backend`, such as ``x90``, ``x90m``,
  etc, will properly be set.
  Fixed `#5363 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5363>`__

- Fixed an issue where unbound parameters only occurring in
  the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` attribute of
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object would not
  show in the :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.parameters` attribute
  and could not be bound.
  Fixed `#5806 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5806>`__

- The :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.calibrations` attribute
  of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects are now preserved when
  the ``+=`` (ie the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.extend`
  method) and the ``+`` (ie the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.combine`
  method) are used.
  Fixed `#5930 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/5930>`__ and
  `#5908 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5908>`__

- The :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Register.name` setter method of class
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Register` (which is the parent class of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister`) previously did not check if
  the assigned string was a valid register name as per the
  `OpenQASM specification <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.03429v2.pdf>`__.
  This check was previously only performed when the name was specified in the
  constructor, this has now been fixed so that setting the ``name``
  attribute directly with an invalid value will now also raise an
  exception.
  Fixed `#5461 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5461>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  and :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method when visualizing a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` that has a classical condition
  after a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Measure` that used the same
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister`, it was possible
  for the conditional :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` to be displayed to the
  left of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Measure`.
  Fixed `#5387 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5387>`__

- In the transpiler pass :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` a bias
  towards lower numbered qubits could be observed. This undesireable bias has
  been fixed by shuffling the candidates to randomize the results.
  Furthermore, the usage of the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout`
  pass in the :mod:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers` (for level 2 and
  3) has been adjusted to use a configured seed if the ``seed_transpiler``
  kwarg is set when :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` is called.
  Fixed `#5990 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5990>`__

- Fixes a bug where the ``channels`` field for a
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` object was
  not being included in the output of the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.to_dict` method.
  Fixed `#5579 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5579>`__

- Fixed the ``'circular'`` entanglement in the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.NLocal` circuit class for the edge
  case where the circuit has the same size as the entanglement block (e.g. a two-qubit
  circuit and CZ entanglement gates). In this case there should only be one entanglement
  gate, but there was accidentially added a second one in the inverse direction as the
  first.
  Fixed `Qiskit/qiskit-aqua#1452 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1452>`__

- Fixed the handling of breakpoints in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewisePolynomialPauliRotations` class
  in the :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`. Now for ``n`` intervals,
  ``n+1`` breakpoints are allowed. This enables specifying another end
  interval other than :math:`2^\text{num qubits}`. This is important because
  from the end of the last interval to :math:`2^\text{num qubits}` the function
  is the identity.

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.Permutation` circuit
  class where some permutations would not be properly generated. This issue
  could also effect :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume` if it were
  called with `classical_permutation=False``.
  Fixed `#5812 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5812>`__

- Fixed an issue where generating QASM output with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` method for a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object that has a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` with an open control the output
  would be as if all controls were closed independent of the specified
  control state. This would result in a different circuit being created
  from :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` if
  parsing the generated QASM.

  This was fixed by updating the QASM output from
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` by defining a composite gate
  which uses :class:`~qiskit.circuit.XGate` to implement the open controls.
  The composite gate is named like ``<original_gate_name>_o<ctrl_state>``
  where ``o`` stands for open control and ``ctrl_state`` is the integer value
  of the control state.
  Fixed `#5443 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5443>`__

- Fixed an issue where binding :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects
  in a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with the ``parameter_binds``
  in the :class:`~qiskit.execute_function.execute` function would cause all
  the bound :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects would have the
  same :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.name`, which meant the
  result names were also not unique. This fix causes
  the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters` to assign a unique
  circuit name when ``inplace=False`` as::

     <base name>-<class instance no.>[-<pid name>]

  where ``<base name>`` is the name supplied by the "name" kwarg,
  otherwise it defaults to "circuit". The class instance number gets
  incremented every time an instance of the class is generated. ``<pid name>``
  is appended if called outside the main process.
  Fixed `#5185 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5185>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.scheduler` function where
  it would raise an exception if an input circuit contained an unbound
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object.
  Fixed `#5304 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5304>`__

- Fixed an issue in the :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization`
  transpiler passes where template circuits that contained unbound
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects would crash under some scenarios
  if the parameters could not be bound during the template matching.
  Now, if the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects can not be bound
  templates with unbound :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` are discarded and
  ignored by the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization` pass.
  Fixed `#5533 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5533>`__

- Fixed an issue with the :func:`qiskit.visualization.timeline_drawer`
  function where classical bits were inproperly handled.
  Fixed `#5361 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5361>`__

- Fixed an issue in the :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  and the :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method where
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` instructions in a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object were not being correctly
  treated as idle time. So when the ``idle_wires`` kwarg was set to
  ``False`` the wires with the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` objects would
  still be shown. This has been fixed so that the idle wires are removed from
  the visualization if there are only :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` objects
  on a wire.

- Previously, when the option ``layout_method`` kwarg was provided to
  the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function and the
  ``optimization_level`` kwarg was set to >= 2 so that the pass
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` would run, if
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` found a solution then
  the method in ``layout_method`` was not executed. This has been fixed so
  that if specified, the ``layout_method`` is always honored.
  Fixed `#5409 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5409>`__

- When the argument ``coupling_map=None`` (either set explicitly, set
  implicitly as the default value, or via the ``backend`` kwarg), the
  transpiling process was not "embedding" the circuit. That is, even when an
  ``initial_layout`` was specified, the virtual qubits were not assigned to
  physical qubits. This has been fixed so that now, the
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` function honors the ``initial_layout``
  argument by embedding the circuit:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister
      from qiskit.compiler import transpile

      qr = QuantumRegister(2, name='qr')
      circ = QuantumCircuit(qr)
      circ.h(qr[0])
      circ.cx(qr[0], qr[1])

      transpile(circ, initial_layout=[1, 0]).draw(output='mpl')


  If the ``initial_layout`` refers to more qubits than in the circuit, the
  transpiling process will extended the circuit with ancillas.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister
      from qiskit.compiler import transpile

      qr = QuantumRegister(2, name='qr')
      circ = QuantumCircuit(qr)
      circ.h(qr[0])
      circ.cx(qr[0], qr[1])

      transpile(circ, initial_layout=[4, 2], coupling_map=None).draw()

  Fixed `#5345 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5345>`__

- A new kwarg, ``user_cost_dict`` has been added to the constructor for the
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization` transpiler pass.
  This enables users to provide a custom cost dictionary for the gates to
  the underlying template matching algorithm. For example::

    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import TemplateOptimization

    cost_dict = {'id': 0, 'x': 1, 'y': 1, 'z': 1, 'h': 1, 't': 1}
    pass = TemplateOptimization(user_cost_dict=cost_dict)

- An issue when passing the :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object
  returned by :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_counts` to
  :func:`~qiskit.result.marginal_counts` would produce an improperly
  formatted :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object with certain inputs has
  been fixed. Fixes
  `#5424 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5424>`__

- Improved the allocation of helper qubits in
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseLinearPauliRotations` which makes
  the implementation of these circuit more efficient.
  Fixed `#5320 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5320>`__ and
  `#5322 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5322>`__

- Fix the usage of the allocated helper qubits in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXGate` in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder` class. These were previously
  allocated but not used prior to this fix.
  Fixed `#5321 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5321>`__

- In a number of cases, the ``latex`` output method for the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method did not display the
  gate name correctly, and in other cases, did not include gate parameters
  where they should be. Now the gate names will be displayed the same way
  as they are displayed with the ``mpl`` output method, and parameters will
  display for all the gates that have them. In addition, some of the gates
  did not display in the correct form, and these have been fixed. Fixes
  `#5605 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5605>`__,
  `#4938 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4938>`__, and
  `#3765 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3765>`__

- Fixed an issue where, if the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction.to_instruction` method was used on a subcircuit which
  contained classical registers and that
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` object was then added to a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object, then the output from the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method would in some instances
  display the subcircuit to the left of a measure when it should have been
  displayed to the right.
  Fixed `#5947 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5947>`__

- Fixed an issue with :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` objects in a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` where
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` would not be convert the units of
  the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Delay` to the units of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.Backend`, if the ``backend`` kwarg is set on
  :func:`~qiskit.circuit.transpile`. This could result in the wrong behavior
  because of a unit mismatch, for example running::

    from qiskit import transpile, execute
    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
    qc.delay(100, [0], unit='us')

    qc = transpile(qc, backend)
    job = execute(qc, backend)

  would previously have resulted in the backend delay for 100 timesteps (each
  of duration dt) rather than expected (100e-6 / dt) timesteps. This has been
  corrected so the :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` function properly
  converts the units.


.. _Release Notes_0.17.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The snapshots of all the fake/mock backends in ``qiskit.test.mock`` have
  been updated to reflect recent device changes. This includes a change in
  the :attr:`~qiskit.providers.models.QasmBackendConfiguration.basis_gates`
  attribute for the :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`
  to ``['cx', 'rz', 'sx', 'x', 'id']``, the addition of a ``readout_length``
  property to the qubit properties in the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties`, and updating the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` so that all the mock
  backends support parametric pulse based
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` instances.

.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0:

Aer 0.8.0
============

.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.8 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The
highlights for this release are: the introduction of a unified
:class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` backend for running circuit
simulations using any of the supported simulation methods; a simulator
instruction library (:mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.library`)
which includes custom instructions for saving various kinds of simulator
data; MPI support for running large simulations on a distributed
computing environment.


.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Python 3.9 support has been added in this release. You can now run Qiskit
  Aer using Python 3.9 without building from source.

- Add the CMake flag ``DISABLE_CONAN`` (default=``OFF``)s. When installing from source,
  setting this to ``ON`` allows bypassing the Conan package manager to find libraries
  that are already installed on your system. This is also available as an environment
  variable ``DISABLE_CONAN``, which takes precedence over the CMake flag.
  This is not the official procedure to build AER. Thus, the user is responsible
  of providing all needed libraries and corresponding files to make them findable to CMake.

- This release includes support for building qiskit-aer with MPI support to
  run large simulations on a distributed computing environment. See the
  `contributing guide <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#building-with-mpi-support>`__
  for instructions on building and running in an MPI environment.

- It is now possible to build qiskit-aer with CUDA enabled in Windows.
  See the
  `contributing guide <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#building-with-gpu-support>`__
  for instructions on building from source with GPU support.

- When building the qiskit-aer Python extension from source several build
  dependencies need to be pre-installed to enable C++ compilation. As a
  user convenience when building the extension any of these build
  dependencies which were missing would be automatically installed using
  ``pip`` prior to the normal ``setuptools`` installation steps, however it was
  previously was not possible to avoid this automatic installation. To solve
  this issue a new environment variable ``DISABLE_DEPENDENCY_INSTALL``
  has been added. If it is set to ``1`` or ``ON`` when building the python
  extension from source this will disable the automatic installation of these
  missing build dependencies.

- Adds support for optimized N-qubit Pauli gate (
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.PauliGate`) to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  statevector and density matrix methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`.

- The :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator.run` method for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` backends now takes a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` (or a list of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects) as it's input.
  The previous :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` object is still supported for
  now, but will be deprecated in a future release.

  For an example of how to use this see::

    from qiskit import transpile, QuantumCircuit

    from qiskit.providers.aer import Aer

    backend = Aer.get_backend('aer_simulator')

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    qc.measure_all()

    tqc = transpile(circuit, backend)
    result = backend.run(tqc, shots=4096).result()

- The :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator.run` method for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator` backend now takes a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` (or a list of
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` objects) as it's input.
  The previous :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` object is still supported for
  now, but will be deprecated in a future release.

- Adds the new :class:`~qiskit.provider.aer.AerSimulator` simulator backend
  supporting the following simulation methods

    * ``automatic``
    * ``statevector``
    * ``stabilizer``
    * ``density_matrix``
    * ``matrix_product_state``
    * ``unitary``
    * ``superop``

  The default `automatic` method will automatically choose a simulation
  method separately for each run circuit based on the circuit instructions
  and noise model (if any). Initializing a simulator with a specific
  method can be done using the `method` option.

  .. code::python

    from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator

    # Create a MPS simulator backend
    backend = AerSimulator(method='matrix_product_state')

  GPU simulation for the statevector, density matrix and unitary methods
  can be enabled by setting the ``device='GPU'`` backend option.

  .. code::python

    from qiskit.providers.aer import AerSimulator

    # Create a GPU statevector backend
    backend = AerSimulator(method='statevector', device='GPU')

  Note that the ``unitary`` and ``superop`` methods do not support measurement
  as they simulate the unitary matrix or superoperator matrix of the run
  circuit so one of the new :func:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_unitary`,
  :func:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_superop`, or
  :func:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_state` instructions must
  be used to save the simulator state to the returned results. Similarly
  state of the other simulations methods can be saved using the
  appropriate instructions. See the :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.library`
  API documents for more details.

  Note that the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` simulator
  superceds the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` backends which will
  be deprecated in a future release.

- Updates the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider` class to include
  multiple :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` backends preconfigured
  for all available simulation methods and simulation devices. The new
  backends can be accessed through the provider interface using the names

    * ``"aer_simulator"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_statevector"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_stabilizer"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_density_matrix"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_matrix_product_state"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_extended_stabilizer"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_unitary"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_superop"``

  Additional if Aer was installed with GPU support on a compatible system
  the following GPU backends will also be available

    * ``"aer_simulator_statevector_gpu"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_density_matrix_gpu"``
    * ``"aer_simulator_unitary_gpu"``

  For example::

    from qiskit import Aer

    # Get the GPU statevector simulator backend
    backend = Aer.get_backend('aer_simulator_statevector_gpu')

- Added a new ``norm estimation`` method for performing measurements when using
  the ``"extended_stabilizer"`` simulation method. This norm estimation method
  can be used by passing the following options to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` backends

  .. code-block:: python

    simulator = QasmSimulator(
        method='extended_stabilizer',
        extended_stabilizer_sampling_method='norm_estimation')

  The norm estimation method is slower than the alternative ``metropolis``
  or ``resampled_metropolis`` options, but gives better performance on circuits
  with sparse output distributions. See the documentation of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` for more information.

- Adds instructions for saving the state of the simulator in various
  formats. These instructions are

  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveDensityMatrix`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveMatrixProductState`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveStabilizer`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveState`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveStatevector`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveStatevectorDict`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveUnitary`

  These instructions can be appended to a quantum circuit by using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_density_matrix`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_matrix_product_state`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_stabilizer`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_state`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_statevector`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_statevector_dict`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_unitary`
  circuit methods which are added to ``QuantumCircuit`` when importing Aer.

  See the :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.library` API documentation
  for details on method compatibility for each instruction.

  Note that the snapshot instructions
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotStatevector`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotDensityMatrix`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotStabilizer` are
  still supported but will be deprecated in a future release.

- Adds :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValue` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveExpectationValueVariance`
  quantum circuit instructions for saving the expectation value
  :math:`\langle H\rangle = Tr[H\rho]`, or expectation value and variance
  :math:`Var(H) = \langle H^2\rangle - \langle H\rangle^2`,
  of a Hermitian operator :math:`H` for the simulator state :math:`\rho`.
  These instruction can be appended to a quantum circuit by using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_expectation_value` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_expectation_value_variance`
  circuit methods which is added to ``QuantumCircuit`` when importing Aer.

  Note that the snapshot instruction
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotExpectationValue`,
  is still supported but will be deprecated in a future release.

- Adds :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveProbabilities` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveProbabilitiesDict` quantum
  circuit instruction for saving all measurement outcome probabilities for
  Z-basis measurements of the simualtor state. These instruction can be
  appended to a quantum circuit by using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_probabilities` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_probabilities_dict` circuit
  methods which is added to ``QuantumCircuit`` when importing Aer.

  Note that the snapshot instruction
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotProbabilities`,
  is still supported but will be deprecated in a future release.

- Adds :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveAmplitudes` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SaveAmplitudesSquared`
  circuit instructions for saving select complex statevector amplitudes,
  or select probabilities (amplitudes squared) for supported simulation
  methods. These instructions can be appended to a quantum circuit by using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_amplitudes` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.save_amplitudes_squared` circuit
  methods which is added to ``QuantumCircuit`` when importing Aer.

- Adds instructions for setting the state of the simulators. These
  instructions must be defined on the full number of qubits in the circuit.
  They can be applied at any point in a circuit and will override the
  simulator state with the one specified. Added instructions are

  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SetDensityMatrix`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SetStabilizer`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SetStatevector`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.library.SetUnitary`

  These instruction can be appended to a quantum circuit by using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.set_density_matrix`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.set_stabilizer`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.set_statevector`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.library.set_unitary`
  circuit methods which are added to ``QuantumCircuit`` when importing Aer.

  See the :mod:`qiskit.providers.aer.library` API documentation
  for details on method compatibility for each instruction.

- Added support for diagonal gates to the ``"matrix_product_state"`` simulation
  method.

- Added support for the ``initialize`` instruction to the
  ``"matrix_product_state"`` simulation method.


.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- There is a known issue where the simulation of certain circuits with a Kraus
  noise model using the ``"matrix_product_state"`` simulation method can cause
  the simulator to crash. Refer to
  `#306 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1184>`__ for more
  information.


.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The minimum version of `Conan <https://conan.io/>`__ has been increased to 1.31.2.
  This was necessary to fix a compatibility issue with newer versions of the
  `urllib3 <https://pypi.org/project/urllib3/>`__ (which is a dependency of Conan).
  It also adds native support for AppleClang 12 which is useful for users with
  new Apple computers.

- ``pybind11`` minimum version required is 2.6 instead of 2.4. This is needed
  in order to support CUDA enabled compilation in Windows.

- Cython has been removed as a build dependency.

- Removed x90 gate decomposition from noise models that was deprecated
  in qiskit-aer 0.7. This decomposition is now done by using regular
  noise model basis gates and the qiskit transpiler.

- The following options for the ``"extended_stabilizer"`` simulation method
  have changed.

    + ``extended_stabilizer_measure_sampling``: This option has been replaced
      by the options ``extended_stabilizer_sampling_method``, which controls
      how we simulate qubit measurement.

    + ``extended_stabilizer_mixing_time``: This option has been renamed as
      ``extended_stabilizer_metropolis_mixing_time`` to clarify it only applies
      to the ``metropolis`` and ``resampled_metropolis`` sampling methods.

    + ``extended_stabilizer_norm_estimation_samples``: This option has been renamed
      to ``extended_stabilizer_norm_estimation_default_samples``.

  One additional option, ``extended_stabilizer_norm_estimation_repetitions`` has been
  added, whih controls part of the behaviour of the norm estimation sampling method.


.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Python 3.6 support has been deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. When support is removed you will need to upgrade the Python
  version you're using to Python 3.7 or above.


.. _Aer_Release Notes_0.8.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes bug with :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider` where options set
  on the returned backends using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.set_options` were stored in the
  provider and would persist for subsequent calls to
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider.get_backend` for the same named
  backend. Now every call to
  and :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider.backends` returns a new
  instance of the simulator backend that can be configured.

- Fixes bug in the error message returned when a circuit contains unsupported
  simulator instructions. Previously some supported instructions were also
  being listed in the error message along with the unsupported instructions.

- Fixes issue with setting :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`
  basis gates when using ``"method"`` and ``"noise_model"`` options
  together, and when using them with a simulator constructed using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend`. Now the
  listed basis gates will be the intersection of gates supported by
  the backend configuration, simulation method, and noise model basis
  gates. If the intersection of the noise model basis gates and
  simulator basis gates is empty a warning will be logged.

- Fix bug where the ``"sx"``` gate :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXGate` was
  not listed as a supported gate in the C++ code, in ``StateOpSet`` of
  ``matrix_product_state.hp``.

- Fix bug where ``"csx"``, ``"cu2"``, ``"cu3"`` were incorrectly listed as
  supported basis gates for the ``"density_matrix"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Fix bug where parameters were passed incorrectly between functions in
  ``matrix_product_state_internal.cpp``, causing wrong simulation, as well
  as reaching invalid states, which in turn caused an infinite loop.

- Fixes a bug that resulted in ``c_if`` not working when the
  width of the conditional register was greater than 64. See
  `#1077 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1077>`__.

- Fixes a bug `#1153 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1153>`__)
  where noise on conditional gates was always being applied regardless of
  whether the conditional gate was actually applied based on the classical
  register value. Now noise on a conditional gate will only be applied in
  the case where the conditional gate is applied.

- Fixes a bug with nested OpenMP flag was being set to true when it
  shouldn't be.

- Fixes a bug when applying truncation in the matrix product state method of the QasmSimulator.

- Fixed issue `#1126 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1126>`__:
  bug in reporting measurement of a single qubit. The bug occured when copying
  the measured value to the output data structure.

- In MPS, apply_kraus was operating directly on the input bits in the
  parameter qubits, instead of on the internal qubits. In the MPS algorithm,
  the qubits are constantly moving around so all operations should be applied
  to the internal qubits.

- When invoking MPS::sample_measure, we need to first sort the qubits to the
  default ordering because this is the assumption in qasm_controller.This is
  done by invoking the method move_all_qubits_to_sorted_ordering. It was
  correct in sample_measure_using_apply_measure, but missing in
  sample_measure_using_probabilities.

- Fixes bug with the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend`
  method of the :class:`~qiskit.provider.aer.QasmSimulator` that would set the
  ``local`` attribute of the configuration to the backend value rather than
  always being set to ``True``.

- Fixes bug in
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.from_backend` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend` where
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.basis_gates` was set
  incorrectly for IBMQ devices with basis gate set
  ``['id', 'rz', 'sx', 'x', 'cx']``. Now the noise model will always
  have the same basis gates as the backend basis gates regardless of
  whether those instructions have errors in the noise model or not.

- Fixes an issue where the Extended `"extended_stabilizer"` simulation method
  would give incorrect results on quantum circuits with sparse output
  distributions. Refer to
  `#306 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/306>`__ for more
  information and examples.

Ignis 0.6.0
===========

.. _Ignis_Release Notes_0.6.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.expval_meas_mitigator_circuits` function
  has been improved so that the number of circuits generated by the function
  used for calibration by the CTMP method are reduced from :math:`O(n)` to
  :math:`O(\log{n})` (where :math:`n` is the number of qubits).


.. _Ignis_Release Notes_0.6.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function is now using the upgraded CNOTDihedral class,
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.CNOTDihedral`, which enables performing
  CNOT-Dihedral Randomized Benchmarking on more than two qubits.

- The python package ``retworkx`` is now a requirement for installing
  qiskit-ignis. It replaces the previous usage of ``networkx`` (which is
  no longer a requirement) to get better performance.

- The ``scikit-learn`` dependency is no longer required and is now an optional
  requirement. If you're using the IQ measurement discriminators
  (:class:`~qiskit.ignis.measurement.IQDiscriminationFitter`,
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.measurement.LinearIQDiscriminationFitter`,
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.measurement.QuadraticIQDiscriminationFitter`,
  or :class:`~qiskit.ignis.measurement.SklearnIQDiscriminator`) you will
  now need to manually install scikit-learn, either by running
  ``pip install scikit-learn`` or when you're also installing
  qiskit-ignis with ``pip install qiskit-ignis[iq]``.


.. _Ignis_Release Notes_0.6.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue in the expectation value method
  :meth:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredExpvalMeasMitigator.expectation_value`,
  for the error mitigation classes
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.TensoredExpvalMeasMitigator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.CTMPExpvalMeasMitigator` if the
  ``qubits`` kwarg was not specified it would incorrectly use the
  total number of qubits of the mitigator, rather than the number of
  classical bits in the count dictionary leading to greatly reduced
  performance.
  Fixed `#561 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis/issues/561>`__

- Fix the ``"auto"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.TomographyFitter`,
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.StateTomographyFitter`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.ProcessTomographyFitter` to
  only use ``"cvx"`` if CVXPY is installed *and* a third-party SDP solver
  other than SCS is available. This is because the SCS solver has lower
  accuracy than other solver methods and often returns a density matrix or
  Choi-matrix that is not completely-positive and fails validation when used
  with the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.state_fidelity` or
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity` functions.

Aqua 0.9.0
==========

This release officially deprecates the Qiskit Aqua project, in the future
(no sooner than 3 months from this release) the Aqua project will have it's
final release and be archived. All the functionality that qiskit-aqua provides
has been migrated to either new packages or to other qiskit packages. The
application modules that are provided by qiskit-aqua have been split into
several new packages: ``qiskit-optimization``, ``qiskit-nature``,
``qiskit-machine-learning``, and ``qiskit-finance``. These packages can be
installed by themselves (via the standard pip install command,
ie ``pip install qiskit-nature``) or with the rest of the Qiskit metapackage as
optional extras (ie, ``pip install 'qiskit[finance,optimization]'`` or
``pip install 'qiskit[all]'``. The core building blocks for algorithms and the
operator flow now exist as part of qiskit-terra at :mod:`qiskit.algorithms` and
:mod:`qiskit.opflow`. Depending on your existing usage of Aqua you should either
use the application packages or the new modules in Qiskit Terra.

For more details on how to migrate from using Qiskit Aqua you can refer to the
:ref:`aqua-migration`.

IBM Q Provider 0.12.2
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.24.1
*************

Terra 0.16.4
============

No change

Aer 0.7.6
=========

No change

Ignis 0.5.2
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.2
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.12.2
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.2_New Features:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.defaults` now returns the pulse defaults for
  the backend if the backend supports pulse. However, your provider may not support pulse
  even if the backend does. The ``open_pulse`` flag in backend configuration indicates
  whether the provider supports it.

*************
Qiskit 0.24.0
*************

Terra 0.16.4
============

No change

Aer 0.7.6
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.6_New Features:

New Features
-------------

- This is the first release of qiskit-aer that publishes precompiled binaries
  to PyPI for Linux on aarch64 (arm64). From this release onwards Linux aarch64
  packages will be published and supported.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.6_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes a bug `#1153 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1153>`__
  where noise on conditional gates was always being applied regardless of
  whether the conditional gate was actually applied based on the classical
  register value. Now noise on a conditional gate will only be applied in
  the case where the conditional gate is applied.

- Fixed issue `#1126 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1126>`__:
  bug in reporting measurement of a single qubit. The bug occured when
  copying the measured value to the output data structure.

- There was previously a mismatch between the default reported number of qubits
  the Aer backend objects would say were supported and the the maximum number
  of qubits the simulator would actually run. This was due to a mismatch
  between the Python code used for calculating the max number of qubits and
  the C++ code used for a runtime check for the max number of qubits based on
  the available memory. This has been correct so by default now Aer backends
  will allow running circuits that can fit in all the available system memory.
  Fixes `#1114 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1126>`__


No change

Ignis 0.5.2
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.2
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.12.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method now takes one or more
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` or :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`.
  Use of :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` and :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` is
  now deprecated. Runtime configuration options, such as the number of shots,
  can be set via either the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run`
  method, or the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.set_options` method.
  The former is used as a one-time setting for the job, and the latter for all
  jobs sent to the backend. If an option is set in both places, the value set
  in :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` takes precedence.

- IBM Quantum credentials are now loaded only from sections of the ``qiskitrc``
  file that start with 'ibmq'.

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Python 3.9 support has been added in this release. You can now run Qiskit
  IBMQ provider using Python 3.9.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.backends` now has a new
  parameter `min_num_qubits` that allows you to filter by the minimum number
  of qubits.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method now takes one or more
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` or :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`.
  Runtime configuration options, such as the number of shots, can be set via
  either the :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method, or
  the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.set_options` method. The former
  is used as a one-time setting for the job, and the latter for all jobs
  sent to the backend. If an option is set in both places, the value set
  in :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` takes precedence. For
  example:

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit import IBMQ, transpile
      from qiskit.test.reference_circuits import ReferenceCircuits

      provider = IBMQ.load_account()
      backend = provider.get_backend('ibmq_vigo')
      circuits = transpile(ReferenceCircuits.bell(), backend=backend)
      default_shots = backend.options.shots  # Returns the backend default of 1024 shots.
      backend.set_options(shots=2048)        # All jobs will now have use 2048 shots.
      backend.run(circuits)                  # This runs with 2048 shots.
      backend.run(circuits, shots=8192)      # This runs with 8192 shots.
      backend.run(circuits)                  # This again runs with 2048 shots.


- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.Experiment` now has three
  additional attributes, `hub`, `group`, and `project`, that identify
  the provider used to create the experiment.

- You can now assign an ``experiment_id`` to a job when submitting it using
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run`. You can use this new field
  to group together a collection of jobs that belong to the same experiment.
  The :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackendService.jobs` method was also
  updated to allow filtering by ``experiment_id``.

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.Experiment` now has two
  additional attributes:

  * share_level: The level at which the experiment is shared which determines
    who can see it when listing experiments. This can be updated.
  * owner: The ID of the user that uploaded the experiment. This is set by
    the server and cannot be updated.

- The method
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experimentservice.ExperimentService.experiments`
  now accepts ``hub``, ``group``, and ``project`` as filtering keywords.

- Methods
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.experiments` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.analysis_results`
  now support a ``limit`` parameter that allows you to limit the number of
  experiments and analysis results returned.

- The method
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experimentservice.ExperimentService.experiments`
  now accepts ``exclude_mine`` and ``mine_only`` as filtering keywords.

- The method
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experimentservice.ExperimentService.experiments`
  now accepts ``exclude_public`` and ``public_only`` as filtering keywords.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager.run` now accepts a
  single :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` or
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` in addition to a list of them.

- The :func:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.least_busy` function now skips backends
  that are operational but paused, meaning they are accepting but not
  processing jobs.

- You can now pickle an :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` instance,
  as long as it doesn't contain custom data that is not picklable (e.g.
  in Qobj header).

- You can now use the two new methods,
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.services` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.service` to find out what
  services are available to your account and get an instance of a
  particular service.

- The :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.reservations` method
  now always returns the reservation scheduling modes even for
  reservations that you don't own.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- A number of previously deprecated methods and features have been removed,
  including:

    * :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.to_dict`
    * :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.from_dict`
    * `Qconfig.py` support
    * Use of proxy URLs that do not include protocols

- A new parameter, ``limit`` is now the first parameter for both
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.experiments` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.analysis_results`
  methods. This ``limit`` has a default value of 10, meaning by deafult only
  10 experiments and analysis results will be returned.

- IBM Quantum credentials are now loaded only from sections of the ``qiskitrc``
  file that start with 'ibmq'.
  This allows the ``qiskitrc`` file to be used for other functionality.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Use of :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` and :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` in
  the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run` method is now deprecated.
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` and :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`
  should now be used instead.

- The ``backends`` attribute of :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider`
  has been renamed to ``backend`` (sigular). For backward compatibility, you
  can continue to use ``backends``, but it is deprecated and will be removed
  in a future release. The :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.AccountProvider.backends`
  method remains unchanged. For example:

  .. code-block:: python

      backend = provider.backend.ibmq_vigo   # This is the new syntax.
      backend = provider.backends.ibmq_vigo  # This is deprecated.
      backends = provider.backends()         # This continues to work as before.

- Setting of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob`
  ``client_version`` attribute has been deprecated. You can, however, continue
  to read the value of attribute.

- "The ``validate_qobj`` keyword in :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run`
  is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  If you're relying on this schema validation you should pull the schemas
  from the `Qiskit/ibmq-schemas <https://github.com/Qiskit/ibm-quantum-schemas>`_
  and directly validate your payloads with that.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.12.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue wherein a job could be left in the ``CREATING`` state if
  job submit fails half-way through.

- Fixes the issue wherein using Jupyter backend widget would fail if the
  backend's basis gates do not include the traditional u1, u2, and u3.
  Fixes `#844 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/844>`_

- Fixes the infinite loop raised when passing an ``IBMQRandomService`` instance
  to a child process.

- Fixes the issue wherein a ``TypeError`` is raised if the server returns
  an error code but the response data is not in the expected format.

*************
Qiskit 0.23.6
*************

Terra 0.16.4
============

No change

Aer 0.7.5
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.5_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release is a bugfix release that fixes compatibility in the precompiled
binary wheel packages with numpy versions < 1.20.0. The previous release 0.7.4
was building the binaries in a way that would require numpy 1.20.0 which has
been resolved now, so the precompiled binary wheel packages will work with any
numpy compatible version.

Ignis 0.5.2
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.2
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.23.5
*************

Terra 0.16.4
============

.. _Release Notes_0.16.4_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release is a bugfix release that primarily fixes compatibility with numpy
1.20.0. This numpy release deprecated their local aliases for Python's numeric
types (``np.int`` -> ``int``, ``np.float`` -> ``float``, etc.) and the usage of
these aliases in Qiskit resulted in a large number of deprecation warnings being
emitted. This release fixes this so you can run Qiskit with numpy 1.20.0 without
those deprecation warnings.

Aer 0.7.4
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.4_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
----------

Fixes compatibility with numpy 1.20.0. This numpy release deprecated their local
aliases for Python's numeric types (``np.int`` -> ``int``,
``np.float`` -> ``float``, etc.) and the usage of these aliases in Qiskit Aer
resulted in a large number of deprecation warnings being emitted. This release
fixes this so you can run Qiskit Aer with numpy 1.20.0 without those deprecation
warnings.

Ignis 0.5.2
===========

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.2_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release is a bugfix release that primarily fixes compatibility with numpy
1.20.0. It is also the first release to include support for Python 3.9. Earlier
releases (including 0.5.0 and 0.5.1) worked with Python 3.9 but did not
indicate this in the package metadata, and there was no upstream testing for
those releases. This release fixes that and was tested on Python 3.9 (in
addition to 3.6, 3.7, and 3.8).

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- `networkx <https://networkx.org/>`__ is explicitly listed as a dependency
  now. It previously was an implicit dependency as it was required for the
  :mod:`qiskit.ignis.verification.topological_codes` module but was not
  correctly listed as a depdendency as qiskit-terra also requires networkx
  and is also a depdency of ignis so it would always be installed in practice.
  However, it is necessary to list it as a requirement for future releases
  of qiskit-terra that will not require networkx. It's also important to
  correctly list the dependencies of ignis in case there were a future
  incompatibility between version requirements.

Aqua 0.8.2
==========


IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.23.4
*************

Terra 0.16.3
============

.. _Release Notes_0.16.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue introduced in 0.16.2 that would cause errors when running
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` on a circuit with a series of 1 qubit
  gates and a non-gate instruction that only operates on a qubit (e.g.
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Reset`). Fixes
  `#5736 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5736>`__

Aer 0.7.3
=========

No change

Ignis 0.5.1
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.23.3
*************

Terra 0.16.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.16.2_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Python 3.9 support has been added in this release. You can now run Qiskit
  Terra using Python 3.9.


.. _Release Notes_0.16.2_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The class :class:`~qiskit.library.standard_gates.x.MCXGrayCode` will now create
  a ``C3XGate`` if ``num_ctrl_qubits`` is 3 and a ``C4XGate`` if ``num_ctrl_qubits``
  is 4. This is in addition to the previous functionality where for any of the
  modes of the :class:'qiskit.library.standard_gates.x.MCXGate`, if ``num_ctrl_bits``
  is 1, a ``CXGate`` is created, and if 2, a ``CCXGate`` is created.


.. _Release Notes_0.16.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Pulse :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Delay` instructions are now
  explicitly assembled as :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjInstruction` objects
  included in the :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` output from
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble`.

  Previously, we could ignore :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Delay`
  instructions in a :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` as part of
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` as the time was explicit in the
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` objects. But, now with pulse gates, there
  are situations where we can schedule ONLY a delay, and not including the
  delay itself would remove the delay.

- Circuits with custom gate calibrations can now be scheduled with the
  transpiler without explicitly providing the durations of each circuit
  calibration.

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Unroller` passes, in some cases, had not been
  preserving the global phase of the circuit under transpilation. This has
  been fixed.

- A bug in :func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.frequency_offset` where when
  ``compensate_phase`` was set a factor of :math:`2\pi`
  was missing from the appended phase.

- Fix the global phase of the output of the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.repeat`. If a circuit with global
  phase is appended to another circuit, the global phase is currently not
  propagated. Simulators rely on this, since the phase otherwise gets
  applied multiple times. This sets the global phase of
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.repeat` to 0 before appending the
  repeated circuit instead of multiplying the existing phase times the
  number of repetitions.

- Fixes bug in :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` where multiplying
  by a certain non Python builtin Numpy scalar types returned incorrect values.
  Fixes `#5408 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5408>`__

- The definition of the Hellinger fidelity from has been corrected from the
  previous defition of :math:`1-H(P,Q)` to :math:`[1-H(P,Q)^2]^2` so that it
  is equal to the quantum state fidelity of P, Q as diagonal density
  matrices.

- Reduce the number of CX gates in the decomposition of the 3-controlled
  X gate, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.C3XGate`. Compiled and optimized
  in the `U CX` basis, now only 14 CX and 16 U gates are used instead of
  20 and 22, respectively.

- Fixes the issue wherein using Jupyter backend widget or
  :meth:`qiskit.tools.backend_monitor` would fail if the
  backend's basis gates do not include the traditional u1, u2, and u3.

- When running :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` on a list of circuits with a
  single element, the function used to return a circuit instead of a list. Now,
  when :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` is called with a list, it will return a
  list even if that list has a single element. See
  `#5260 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5260>`__.

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import *

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    qc.measure_all()

    transpiled = transpile([qc])
    print(type(transpiled), len(transpiled))

  .. parsed-literal::
   <class 'list'> 1

Aer 0.7.3
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.3_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Python 3.9 support has been added in this release. You can now run Qiskit
  Aer using Python 3.9 without building from source.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes issue with setting :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`
  basis gates when using ``"method"`` and ``"noise_model"`` options
  together, and when using them with a simulator constructed using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend`. Now the
  listed basis gates will be the intersection of gates supported by
  the backend configuration, simulation method, and noise model basis
  gates. If the intersection of the noise model basis gates and
  simulator basis gates is empty a warning will be logged.

- Fixes a bug that resulted in `c_if` not working when the
  width of the conditional register was greater than 64. See
  `#1077 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1077>`__.

- Fixes bug in
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.from_backend` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend` where
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.basis_gates` was set
  incorrectly for IBMQ devices with basis gate set
  ``['id', 'rz', 'sx', 'x', 'cx']``. Now the noise model will always
  have the same basis gates as the backend basis gates regardless of
  whether those instructions have errors in the noise model or not.

- Fixes a bug when applying truncation in the matrix product state method of the QasmSimulator.

Ignis 0.5.1
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

No change

*************
Qiskit 0.23.2
*************

Terra 0.16.1
============

No change

Aer 0.7.2
==========

.. _Release Notes_0.7.2_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Add the CMake flag ``DISABLE_CONAN`` (default=``OFF``)s. When installing from source,
  setting this to ``ON`` allows bypassing the Conan package manager to find libraries
  that are already installed on your system. This is also available as an environment
  variable ``DISABLE_CONAN``, which takes precedence over the CMake flag.
  This is not the official procedure to build AER. Thus, the user is responsible
  of providing all needed libraries and corresponding files to make them findable to CMake.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes a bug with nested OpenMP flag was being set to true when it
  shouldn't be.

Ignis 0.5.1
===========

No change

Aqua 0.8.1
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.23.1
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.16.1:

Terra 0.16.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.16.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue where an error was thrown in execute for valid circuits
  built with delays.

- The QASM definition of 'c4x' in qelib1.inc has been corrected to match
  the standard library definition for C4XGate.

- Fixes a bug in subtraction for quantum channels :math:`A - B` where :math:`B`
  was an :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` object. Negation was being
  applied to the matrix in the Operator representation which is not equivalent
  to negation in the quantum channel representation.

- Changes the way
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.states.statevector.Statevector._evolve_instruction`
  access qubits to handle the case of an instruction with multiple registers.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.1:

Aer 0.7.1
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.1_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The minimum cmake version to build qiskit-aer has increased from 3.6 to
  3.8. This change was necessary to enable fixing GPU version builds that
  support running on x86_64 CPUs lacking AVX2 instructions.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- qiskit-aer with GPU support will now work on systems with x86_64 CPUs
  lacking AVX2 instructions. Previously, the GPU package would only run if
  the AVX2 instructions were available. Fixes
  `#1023 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/1023>`__

- Fixes bug with :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider` where options set
  on the returned backends using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.set_options` were stored in the
  provider and would persist for subsequent calls to
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider.get_backend` for the same named
  backend. Now every call to
  and :meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.AerProvider.backends` returns a new
  instance of the simulator backend that can be configured.

- Fixes bug in the error message returned when a circuit contains unsupported
  simulator instructions. Previously some supported instructions were also
  being listed in the error message along with the unsupported instructions.

- Fix bug where the `"sx"`` gate :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXGate` was
  not listed as a supported gate in the C++ code, in `StateOpSet` of
  `matrix_product_state.hp`.

- Fix bug where ``"csx"``, ``"cu2"``, ``"cu3"`` were incorrectly listed as
  supported basis gates for the ``"density_matrix"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- In MPS, apply_kraus was operating directly on the input bits in the
  parameter qubits, instead of on the internal qubits. In the MPS algorithm,
  the qubits are constantly moving around so all operations should be applied
  to the internal qubits.

- When invoking MPS::sample_measure, we need to first sort the qubits to the
  default ordering because this is the assumption in qasm_controller.This is
  done by invoking the method move_all_qubits_to_sorted_ordering. It was
  correct in sample_measure_using_apply_measure, but missing in
  sample_measure_using_probabilities.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.1:

Ignis 0.5.1
===========

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix the ``"auto"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.TomographyFitter`,
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.StateTomographyFitter`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.ProcessTomographyFitter` to
  only use ``"cvx"`` if CVXPY is installed *and* a third-party SDP solver
  other than SCS is available. This is because the SCS solver has lower
  accuracy than other solver methods and often returns a density matrix or
  Choi-matrix that is not completely-positive and fails validation when used
  with the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.state_fidelity` or
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity` functions.

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.1:

Aqua 0.8.1
==========

0.8.1
=====

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.1_New Features:

New Features
------------

- A new algorithm has been added: the Born Openheimer Potential Energy surface for the
  calculation of potential energy surface along different degrees of freedom of the molecule.
  The algorithm is called ``BOPESSampler``. It further provides functionalities of fitting the
  potential energy surface to an analytic function of predefined potentials.some details.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.1_Critical Issues:

Critical Issues
---------------

- Be aware that ``initial_state`` parameter in ``QAOA`` has now different implementation
  as a result of a bug fix. The previous implementation wrongly mixed the user provided
  ``initial_state`` with Hadamard gates. The issue is fixed now. No attention needed if
  your code does not make use of the user provided ``initial_state`` parameter.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- optimize_svm method of qp_solver would sometimes fail resulting in an error like this
  `ValueError: cannot reshape array of size 1 into shape (200,1)` This addresses the issue
  by adding an L2 norm parameter, lambda2, which defaults to 0.001 but can be changed via
  the QSVM algorithm, as needed, to facilitate convergence.

- A method ``one_letter_symbol`` has been removed from the ``VarType`` in the latest
  build of DOCplex making Aqua incompatible with this version. So instead of using this method
  an explicit type check of variable types has been introduced in the Aqua optimization module.

- :meth`~qiskit.aqua.operators.state_fns.DictStateFn.sample()` could only handle
  real amplitudes, but it is fixed to handle complex amplitudes.
  `#1311 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1311>` for more details.

- Trotter class did not use the reps argument in constructor.
  `#1317 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1317>` for more details.

- Raise an `AquaError` if :class`qiskit.aqua.operators.converters.CircuitSampler`
  samples an empty operator.
  `#1321 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1321>` for more details.

- :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.operators.legacy.WeightedPauliOperator.to_opflow()`
  returns a correct operator when coefficients are complex numbers.
  `#1381 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1381>` for more details.

- Let backend simulators validate NoiseModel support instead of restricting to Aer only
  in QuantumInstance.

- Correctly handle PassManager on QuantumInstance ``transpile`` method by
  calling its ``run`` method if it exists.

- A bug that mixes custom ``initial_state`` in ``QAOA`` with Hadamard gates has been fixed.
  This doesn't change functionality of QAOA if no initial_state is provided by the user.
  Attention should be taken if your implementation uses QAOA with cusom ``initial_state``
  parameter as the optimization results might differ.

- Previously, setting `seed_simulator=0` in the `QuantumInstance` did not set
  any seed. This was only affecting the value 0. This has been fixed.


 .. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.11.1:

IBM Q Provider 0.11.1
=====================

 .. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.11.1_New Features:

New Features
------------

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.Experiment` now has three
  additional attributes, `hub`, `group`, and `project`, that identify
  the provider used to create the experiment.

- Methods
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.experiments` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.analysis_results`
  now support a ``limit`` parameter that allows you to limit the number of
  experiments and analysis results returned.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.11.1_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- A new parameter, ``limit`` is now the first parameter for both
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.experiments` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment.ExperimentService.analysis_results`
  methods. This ``limit`` has a default value of 10, meaning by deafult only
  10 experiments and analysis results will be returned.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_0.11.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes the issue wherein a job could be left in the ``CREATING`` state if
  job submit fails half-way through.

- Fixes the infinite loop raised when passing an ``IBMQRandomService`` instance
  to a child process.


*************
Qiskit 0.23.0
*************

Terra 0.16.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.16.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.16.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The
major features in this release are the following:

* Introduction of scheduled circuits, where delays can be used to control
  the timing and alignment of operations in the circuit.
* Compilation of quantum circuits from classical functions, such as
  oracles.
* Ability to compile and optimize single qubit rotations over different
  Euler basis as well as the phase + square-root(X) basis (i.e.
  ``['p', 'sx']``), which will replace the older IBM Quantum basis of
  ``['u1', 'u2', 'u3']``.
* Tracking of :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase` on the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class has been extended through
  the :mod:`~qiskit.transpiler`, :mod:`~qiskit.quantum_info`, and
  :mod:`~qiskit.assembler` modules, as well as the BasicAer and Aer
  simulators. Unitary and state vector simulations will now return global
  phase-correct unitary matrices and state vectors.

Also of particular importance for this release is that Python 3.5 is no
longer supported. If you are using Qiskit Terra with Python 3.5, the
0.15.2 release is that last version which will work.


.. _Release Notes_0.16.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Global R gates have been added to :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`. This
  includes the global R gate (:class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GR`),
  global Rx (:class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GRX`) and global Ry
  (:class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GRY`) gates which are derived from the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GR` gate, and global Rz (
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GRZ`) that is defined in a similar way
  to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GR` gates. The global R gates are
  defined on a number of qubits simultaneously, and act as a direct sum of
  R gates on each qubit.

  For example:

  .. code-block :: python

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister
    import numpy as np

    num_qubits = 3
    qr = QuantumRegister(num_qubits)
    qc = QuantumCircuit(qr)

    qc.compose(GR(num_qubits, theta=np.pi/3, phi=2*np.pi/3), inplace=True)

  will create a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` on a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` of 3 qubits and perform a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RGate` of an angle
  :math:`\theta = \frac{\pi}{3}` about an axis in the xy-plane of the Bloch
  spheres that makes an angle of :math:`\phi = \frac{2\pi}{3}` with the x-axis
  on each qubit.

- A new color scheme, ``iqx``, has been added to the ``mpl`` backend for the
  circuit drawer :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw`. This uses the same color scheme
  as the Circuit Composer on the IBM Quantum Experience website. There are
  now 3 available color schemes - ``default``, ``iqx``, and ``bw``.

  There are two ways to select a color scheme. The first is to use a user
  config file, by default in the ``~/.qiskit`` directory, in the
  file ``settings.conf`` under the ``[Default]`` heading, a user can enter
  ``circuit_mpl_style = iqx`` to select the ``iqx`` color scheme.

  The second way is to add ``{'name': 'iqx'}`` to the ``style`` kwarg to the
  ``QuantumCircuit.draw`` method or to the ``circuit_drawer`` function. The
  second way will override the setting in the settings.conf file. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit.h(0)
    circuit.cx(0, 1)
    circuit.measure_all()
    circuit.draw('mpl', style={'name': 'iqx'})

- In the ``style`` kwarg for the the circuit drawer
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` the ``displaycolor`` field with
  the ``mpl`` backend now allows for entering both the gate color and the text
  color for each gate type in the form ``(gate_color, text_color)``.  This
  allows the use of light and dark gate colors with contrasting text colors.
  Users can still set only the gate color, in which case the ``gatetextcolor``
  field will be used. Gate colors can be set in the ``style`` dict for any
  number of gate types, from one to the entire ``displaycolor`` dict. For
  example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(1)
    circuit.h(0)

    style_dict = {'displaycolor': {'h': ('#FA74A6', '#000000')}}
    circuit.draw('mpl', style=style_dict)

  or

  .. jupyter-execute::

    style_dict = {'displaycolor': {'h': '#FA74A6'}}
    circuit.draw('mpl', style=style_dict)

- Two alignment contexts are added to the pulse builder
  (:mod:`qiskit.pulse.builder`) to facilitate writing a repeated pulse
  sequence with delays.

  * :func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.align_equispaced` inserts delays with
    equivalent length in between pulse schedules within the context.
  * :func:`qiskit.pulse.builder.align_func` offers more advanced control of
    pulse position. This context takes a callable that calculates a fractional
    coordinate of i-th pulse and aligns pulses within the context. This makes
    coding of dynamical decoupling easy.

- A ``rep_delay`` parameter has been added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` class under the run configuration,
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig`. This parameter is used to denote the
  time between program executions. It must be chosen from the backend range
  given by the :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`
  method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.rep_delay_range`. If a
  value is not provided a backend default,
  :attr:`qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.default_rep_delay`,
  will be used. ``rep_delay`` will only work on backends which allow for
  dynamic repetition time. This is can be checked with the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration` property
  :attr:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.dynamic_reprate_enabled`.

- The ``qobj_schema.json`` JSON Schema file in :mod:`qiskit.schemas` has
  been updated to include the ``rep_delay`` as an optional configuration
  property for QASM Qobjs.

- The ``backend_configuration_schema.json`` JSON Schema file in
  :mod:`qiskit.schemas` has been updated to include ``dynamic_reprate_enabled``,
  ``rep_delay_range`` and ``default_rep_delay`` as optional properties for a QASM
  backend configuration payload.

- A new optimization pass,
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization` has been added to
  the transpiler. This pass applies a template matching algorithm described
  in `arXiv:1909.05270 <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.05270.pdf>`__ that
  replaces all compatible maximal matches in the circuit.

  To implement this new transpiler pass a new module, ``template_circuits``,
  was added to the circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`). This new
  module contains all the Toffoli circuit templates used in the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.TemplateOptimization`.

  This new pass is **not** currently included in the preset pass managers
  (:mod:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers`), to use it you will need
  to create a custom :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`.

- A new version of the providers interface has been added. This new interface,
  which can be found in :mod:`qiskit.providers`, provides a new versioning
  mechanism that will enable changes to the interface to happen in a
  compatible manner over time. The new interface should be simple to migrate
  existing providers, as it is mostly identical except for the explicit
  versioning.

  Besides having explicitly versioned abstract classes the key changes for
  the new interface are that the :class:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1`
  method :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BackendV1.run` can now
  take a :class:`~qiskit.circuits.QuantumCircuit` or
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` object as inputs instead of ``Qobj``
  objects. To go along with that options are now part of a backend class
  so that users can configure run time options when running with a circuit.
  The final change is that :class:`qiskit.providers.JobV1` can now be
  synchronous or asynchronous, the exact configuration and method for
  configuring this is up to the provider, but there are interface hook
  points to make it explicit which execution model a job is running under
  in the ``JobV1`` abstract class.

- A new kwarg, ``inplace``, has been added to the function
  :func:`qiskit.result.marginal_counts`. This kwarg is used to control whether
  the contents are marginalized in place or a new copy is returned, for
  :class:`~qiskit.result.Result` object input. This parameter does not have
  any effect for an input ``dict`` or :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object.

- An initial version of a classical function compiler,
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction`, has been added. This
  enables compiling typed python functions (operating only on bits of type
  ``Int1`` at the moment) into :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
  objects. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import classical_function, Int1

    @classical_function
    def grover_oracle(a: Int1, b: Int1, c: Int1, d: Int1) -> Int1:
         x = not a and b
         y = d and not c
         z = not x or y
         return z

    quantum_circuit = grover_oracle.synth()
    quantum_circuit.draw()

  The parameter ``registerless=False`` in the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction.ClassicalFunction` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.classicalfunction.ClassicalFunction.synth` creates a
  circuit with registers refering to the parameter names. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    quantum_circuit = grover_oracle.synth(registerless=False)
    quantum_circuit.draw()

  A decorated classical function can be used the same way as any other
  quantum gate when appending it to a circuit.

  .. jupyter-execute::

    circuit = QuantumCircuit(5)
    circuit.append(grover_oracle, range(5))
    circuit.draw()

  The ``GROVER_ORACLE`` gate is synthesized when its decomposition is required.

  .. jupyter-execute::

    circuit.decompose().draw()

  The feature requires ``tweedledum``, a library for synthesizing quantum
  circuits, that can be installed via pip with ``pip install tweedledum``.

- A new class :class:`qiskit.circuit.Delay` for representing a delay
  instruction in a circuit has been added. A new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.delay` is now available for easily
  appending delays to circuits. This makes it possible to describe
  timing-sensitive experiments (e.g. T1/T2 experiment) in the circuit level.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      qc.delay(500, 0, unit='ns')
      qc.measure(0, 0)

      qc.draw()

- A new argument ``scheduling_method`` for
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` has been added. It is required when
  transpiling circuits with delays.  If ``scheduling_method`` is specified,
  the transpiler returns a scheduled circuit such that all idle times in it
  are padded with delays (i.e. start time of each instruction is uniquely
  determined). This makes it possible to see how scheduled instructions
  (gates) look in the circuit level.

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile
      from qiskit.test.mock.backends import FakeAthens

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)

      scheduled_circuit = transpile(qc, backend=FakeAthens(), scheduling_method="alap")
      print("Duration in dt:", scheduled_circuit.duration)
      scheduled_circuit.draw(idle_wires=False)

  See also :func:`~qiskit.visualization.timeline_drawer` for the best visualization
  of scheduled circuits.

- A new fuction :func:`qiskit.compiler.sequence` has been also added so that
  we can convert a scheduled circuit into a :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`
  to make it executable on a pulse-enabled backend.

  .. code-block:: python

      from qiskit.compiler import sequence

      sched = sequence(scheduled_circuit, pulse_enabled_backend)

- The :func:`~qiskit.compiler.schedule` has been updated so that it can
  schedule circuits with delays. Now there are two paths to schedule a
  circuit with delay:

  .. code-block:: python

      qc = QuantumCircuit(1, 1)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.delay(500, 0, unit='ns')
      qc.h(0)
      qc.measure(0, 0)

      sched_path1 = schedule(qc.decompose(), backend)
      sched_path2 = sequence(transpile(qc, backend, scheduling_method='alap'), backend)
      assert pad(sched_path1) == sched_path2

  Refer to the release notes and documentation for
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and :func:`~qiskit.compiler.sequence`
  for the details on the other path.

- Added the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GroverOperator` to the circuit
  library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`) to construct the Grover operator
  used in Grover's search algorithm and Quantum Amplitude
  Amplification/Estimation. Provided with an oracle in form of a circuit,
  ``GroverOperator`` creates the textbook Grover operator. To generalize
  this for amplitude amplification and use a generic operator instead of
  Hadamard gates as state preparation, the ``state_in`` argument can be
  used.

- The :class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap.get` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap.pop` methods now take
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` instances
  in addition to numerical values for schedule generator parameters. If the
  generator is a function, expressions may be bound before or within the
  function call. If the generator is a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ParametrizedSchedule`, expressions must be
  bound before the schedule itself is bound/called.

- A new class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.LinearAmplitudeFunction` was
  added to the circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`) for mapping
  (piecewise) linear functions on qubit amplitudes,

  .. math::

      F|x\rangle |0\rangle = \sqrt{1 - f(x)}|x\rangle |0\rangle + \sqrt{f(x)}|x\rangle |1\rangle


  The mapping is based on a controlled Pauli Y-rotations and
  a Taylor approximation, as described in https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.06893.
  This circuit can be used to compute expectation values of linear
  functions using the quantum amplitude estimation algorithm.

- The new jupyter magic ``monospaced_output`` has been added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.tools.jupyter` module. This magic sets the Jupyter notebook
  output font to "Courier New", when possible. When used this fonts returns
  text circuit drawings that are better aligned.

  .. code-block:: python

    import qiskit.tools.jupyter
    %monospaced_output

- A new transpiler pass,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGatesDecomposition`,
  has been added. This transpiler pass is an alternative to the existing
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGates` that uses the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` class to decompose
  and simplify a chain of single qubit gates. This method is compatible with
  any basis set, while :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGates`
  only works for u1, u2, and u3. The default pass managers for
  ``optimization_level`` 1, 2, and 3 have been updated to use this new pass
  if the basis set doesn't include u1, u2, or u3.

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` now supports
  two new basis, ``'PSX'`` and ``'U'``. These can be specified with the
  ``basis`` kwarg on the constructor. This will decompose the matrix into a
  circuit using :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PGate` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXGate` for ``'PSX'``, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate` for ``'U'``.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.remove` has been added
  to the :class:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` class. This method enables
  removing a pass from a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` instance.
  It works on indexes, similar to
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.replace`. For example, to
  remove the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveResetInZeroState` pass
  from the pass manager used at optimization level 1:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import level_1_pass_manager
    from qiskit.transpiler.passmanager_config import PassManagerConfig

    pm = level_1_pass_manager(PassManagerConfig())
    pm.draw()

  .. code-block::

    [0] FlowLinear: UnrollCustomDefinitions, BasisTranslator
    [1] FlowLinear: RemoveResetInZeroState
    [2] DoWhile: Depth, FixedPoint, Optimize1qGates, CXCancellation

  The stage ``[1]`` with ``RemoveResetInZeroState`` can be removed like this:

  .. code-block:: python

    pass_manager.remove(1)
    pass_manager.draw()

  .. code-block::

    [0] FlowLinear: UnrollCustomDefinitions, BasisTranslator
    [1] DoWhile: Depth, FixedPoint, Optimize1qGates, CXCancellation

- Several classes to load probability distributions into qubit amplitudes;
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UniformDistribution`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.NormalDistribution`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.LogNormalDistribution` were added to the
  circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`). The normal and
  log-normal distribution support both univariate and multivariate
  distributions. These circuits are central to applications in finance
  where quantum amplitude estimation is used.

- Support for pulse gates has been added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This enables a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` to override (for basis gates) or
  specify (for standard and custom gates) a definition of a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` operation in terms of time-ordered signals
  across hardware channels. In other words, it enables the option to provide
  pulse-level custom gate calibrations.

  The circuits are built exactly as before. For example::

      from qiskit import pulse
      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Gate

      class RxGate(Gate):
          def __init__(self, theta):
              super().__init__('rxtheta', 1, [theta])

      circ = QuantumCircuit(1)
      circ.h(0)
      circ.append(RxGate(3.14), [0])

  Then, the calibration for the gate can be registered using the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.add_calibration` which takes a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` definition as well as the qubits and
  parameters that it is defined for::

      # Define the gate implementation as a schedule
      with pulse.build() as custom_h_schedule:
          pulse.play(pulse.library.Drag(...), pulse.DriveChannel(0))

      with pulse.build() as q1_x180:
          pulse.play(pulse.library.Gaussian(...), pulse.DriveChannel(1))

      # Register the schedule to the gate
      circ.add_calibration('h', [0], custom_h_schedule)  # or gate.name string to register
      circ.add_calibration(RxGate(3.14), [0], q1_x180)   # Can accept gate

  Previously, this functionality could only be used through complete Pulse
  Schedules. Additionally, circuits can now be submitted to backends with
  your custom definitions (dependent on backend support).

  Circuits with pulse gates can still be lowered to a
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` by using the
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.schedule` function.

  The calibrated gate can also be transpiled using the regular transpilation
  process::

      transpiled_circuit = transpile(circ, backend)

  The transpiled circuit will leave the calibrated gates on the same qubit as
  the original circuit and will not unroll them to the basis gates.

- Support for disassembly of :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj` objects has
  been added to the :func:`qiskit.assembler.disassemble` function.
  For example:

  .. code-block::

    from qiskit import pulse
    from qiskit.assembler.disassemble import disassemble
    from qiskit.compiler.assemble import assemble
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeOpenPulse2Q

    backend = FakeOpenPulse2Q()

    d0 = pulse.DriveChannel(0)
    d1 = pulse.DriveChannel(1)
    with pulse.build(backend) as sched:
        with pulse.align_right():
            pulse.play(pulse.library.Constant(10, 1.0), d0)
            pulse.shift_phase(3.11, d0)
            pulse.measure_all()

    qobj = assemble(sched, backend=backend, shots=512)
    scheds, run_config, header = disassemble(qobj)

- A new kwarg, ``coord_type`` has been added to
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_vector`. This kwarg enables
  changing the coordinate system used for the input parameter that
  describes the positioning of the vector on the Bloch sphere in the
  generated visualization. There are 2 supported values for this new kwarg,
  ``'cartesian'`` (the default value) and ``'spherical'``. If the
  ``coord_type`` kwarg is set to ``'spherical'`` the list of parameters
  taken in are of the form ``[r, theta,  phi]`` where ``r`` is the
  radius, ``theta`` is the inclination from +z direction, and ``phi`` is
  the azimuth from +x direction. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from numpy import pi

    from qiskit.visualization import plot_bloch_vector

    x = 0
    y = 0
    z = 1
    r = 1
    theta = pi
    phi = 0


    # Cartesian coordinates, where (x,y,z) are cartesian coordinates
    # for bloch vector
    plot_bloch_vector([x,y,z])

  .. jupyter-execute::

    plot_bloch_vector([x,y,z], coord_type="cartesian")  # Same as line above

  .. jupyter-execute::

    # Spherical coordinates, where (r,theta,phi) are spherical coordinates
    # for bloch vector
    plot_bloch_vector([r, theta, phi], coord_type="spherical")

- Pulse :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` objects now support
  using :py:class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` objects
  for parameters.

  For example::

      from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
      from qiskit import pulse

      alpha = Parameter('')
      phi = Parameter('')
      qubit = Parameter('q')
      amp = Parameter('amp')

      schedule = pulse.Schedule()
      schedule += SetFrequency(alpha, DriveChannel(qubit))
      schedule += ShiftPhase(phi, DriveChannel(qubit))
      schedule += Play(Gaussian(duration=128, sigma=4, amp=amp),
                       DriveChannel(qubit))
      schedule += ShiftPhase(-phi, DriveChannel(qubit))

  Parameter assignment is done via the
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule.assign_parameters` method::

      schedule.assign_parameters({alpha: 4.5e9, phi: 1.57,
                                  qubit: 0, amp: 0.2})

  Expressions and partial assignment also work, such as::

      beta = Parameter('b')
      schedule += SetFrequency(alpha + beta, DriveChannel(0))
      schedule.assign_parameters({alpha: 4.5e9})
      schedule.assign_parameters({beta: phi / 6.28})

- A new visualization function :func:`~qiskit.visualization.timeline_drawer`
  was added to the :mod:`qiskit.visualization` module.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.visualization import timeline_drawer
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeAthens

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    timeline_drawer(transpile(qc, FakeAthens(), scheduling_method='alap'))


.. _Release Notes_0.16.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Type checking for the ``params`` kwarg of the constructor for the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` class and its subclasses has been changed.
  Previously all :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` parameters had to be
  in a set of allowed types defined in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction` class. Now a new method,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.validate_parameter` is used to determine
  if a parameter type is valid or not. The definition of this method in
  a subclass will take priority over its parent. For example,
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` accepts a parameter of the type
  ``numpy.ndarray`` and defines a custom
  :meth:`~qiskit.extensionst.UnitaryGate.validate_parameter` method that
  returns the parameter if it's an ``numpy.ndarray``. This takes priority
  over the function defined in its parent class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate`.
  If :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` were to be used as parent
  for a new class, this ``validate_parameter`` method would be used unless
  the new child class defines its own method.

- The previously deprecated methods, arguments, and properties named
  ``n_qubits`` and ``numberofqubits``  have been removed. These were
  deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. The full set of changes are:

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Class
      - Old
      - New
    * - :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
      - ``n_qubits``
      - :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_qubits`
    * - :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli`
      - ``numberofqubits``
      - :attr:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.num_qubits`

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Function
      - Old Argument
      - New Argument
    * - :func:`qiskit.circuit.random.random_circuit`
      - ``n_qubits``
      - ``num_qubits``
    * - :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.MSGate`
      - ``n_qubits``
      - ``num_qubits``

- Inserting a parameterized :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` instance into
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` now creates a copy of that
  gate which is used in the circuit. If changes are made to the instance
  inserted into the circuit it will no longer be reflected in the gate in
  the circuit. This change was made to fix an issue when inserting a single
  parameterized :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` object into multiple circuits.

- The function :func:`qiskit.result.marginal_counts` now, by default,
  does not modify the :class:`qiskit.result.Result` instance
  parameter. Previously, the ``Result`` object was always modified in place.
  A new kwarg ``inplace`` has been added
  :func:`~qiskit.result.marginal_counts` which enables using the previous
  behavior when ``inplace=True`` is set.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U3Gate` definition has been changed to
  be in terms of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate` class. The
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate` class has no definition. It is
  therefore not possible to unroll **every** circuit in terms of U3
  and CX anymore. Instead, U and CX can be used for **every** circuit.

- The deprecated support for running Qiskit Terra with Python 3.5 has been
  removed. To use Qiskit Terra from this release onward you will now need to
  use at least Python 3.6. If you are using Python 3.5 the last version which
  will work is Qiskit Terra 0.15.2.

- In the :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration`
  in the ``hamiltonian`` attributes the ``vars`` field  is now returned
  in a unit of Hz instead of the previously used GHz. This change was made
  to be consistent with the units used with the other attributes in the
  class.

- The previously deprecated support for passing in a dictionary as the
  first positional argument to :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` constructor
  has been removed. Using a dictonary for the first positional argument
  was deprecated in the 0.13.0 release. To create a
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` object now you should directly
  pass the attributes as kwargs on the constructor.

- The keyword arguments for the circuit gate methods (for example:
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cx`) ``q``, ``ctl*``, and
  ``tgt*``, which were deprecated in the 0.12.0 release, have been removed.
  Instead, only  ``qubit``, ``control_qubit*`` and ``target_qubit*`` can be
  used as named arguments for these methods.

- The previously deprecated module ``qiskit.extensions.standard`` has been
  removed. This module has been deprecated since the 0.14.0 release.
  The :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` can be used instead.
  Additionally, all the gate classes previously in
  ``qiskit.extensions.standard`` are still importable from
  :mod:`qiskit.extensions`.

- The previously deprecated gates in the module
  ``qiskit.extensions.quantum_initializer``:
  ``DiagGate``, `UCG``, ``UCPauliRotGate``, ``UCRot``, ``UCRXGate``, ``UCX``,
  ``UCRYGate``, ``UCY``, ``UCRZGate``, ``UCZ`` have been removed. These were
  all deprecated in the 0.14.0 release and have alternatives available in
  the circuit library (:mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`).

- The previously deprecated :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` gate method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iden` has been removed. This was
  deprecated in the 0.13.0 release and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.i` or
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.id` can be used instead.


Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The use of a ``numpy.ndarray`` for a parameter in the ``params`` kwarg
  for the constructor of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` class and
  subclasses has been deprecated and will be removed in future releases. This
  was done as part of the refactoring of how ``parms`` type checking is
  handled for the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` class. If you have a custom
  gate class which is a subclass of :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` directly
  (or via a different parent in the hierarchy) that accepts an ``ndarray``
  parameter, you should define a custom
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.validate_parameter` method for your class
  that will return the allowed parameter type. For example::

    def validate_parameter(self, parameter):
        """Custom gate parameter has to be an ndarray."""
        if isinstance(parameter, numpy.ndarray):
            return parameter
        else:
            raise CircuitError("invalid param type {0} in gate "
                               "{1}".format(type(parameter), self.name))

- The
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseLinearPauliRotations.num_ancilla_qubits`
  property of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PiecewiseLinearPauliRotations`
  and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations` classes has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead the property
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PolynomialPauliRotations.num_ancillas` should
  be used instead. This was done to make it consistent with the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_ancillas`.

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.MSGate` class has been
  deprecated, but will remain in place to allow loading of old jobs. It has been replaced
  with the :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.GMS` class which should be used
  instead.

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.MSBasisDecomposer` transpiler pass
  has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  The :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` pass can be used
  instead.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods ``u1``, ``u2`` and
  ``u3`` are now deprecated. Instead the following replacements can be
  used.

  .. code-block::

      u1(theta) = p(theta) = u(0, 0, theta)
      u2(phi, lam) = u(pi/2, phi, lam) = p(pi/2 + phi) sx p(pi/2 lam)
      u3(theta, phi, lam) = u(theta, phi, lam) = p(phi + pi) sx p(theta + pi) sx p(lam)

  The gate classes themselves, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U1Gate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U2Gate` and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.U3Gate`
  remain, to allow loading of old jobs.


.. _Release Notes_0.16.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :class:`~qiskit.result.Result` class's methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.data`, :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_memory`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_counts`,  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_unitary`,
  and :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_statevector ` will now emit a warning
  when the ``experiment`` kwarg is specified for attempting to fetch
  results using either a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` or
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` instance, when more than one entry matching
  the instance name is present in the ``Result`` object. Note that only the
  first entry matching this name will be returned. Fixes
  `#3207 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3207>`__

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.append` can now be used to insert one
  parameterized gate instance into multiple circuits. This fixes a previous
  issue where inserting a single parameterized
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` object into multiple circuits would
  cause failures when one circuit had a parameter assigned.
  Fixes `#4697 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4697>`__

- Previously the :func:`qiskit.execute.execute` function would incorrectly
  disallow both the ``backend`` and ``pass_manager`` kwargs to be
  specified at the same time. This has been fixed so that both
  ``backend`` and ``pass_manager`` can be used together on calls to
  :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute`.
  Fixes `#5037 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5037>`__

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.unitary` method has been fixed
  to accept a single integer for the ``qarg`` argument (when adding a
  1-qubit unitary). The allowed types for the ``qargs`` argument are now
  ``int``, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit`, or a list of integers.
  Fixes `#4944 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4944>`__

- Previously, calling :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.library.BlueprintCircuit.inverse`
  on a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.BlueprintCircuit` object
  could fail if its internal data property was not yet populated. This has
  been fixed so that the calling
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.library.BlueprintCircuit.inverse` will populate
  the internal data before generating the inverse of the circuit.
  Fixes `#5140 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5140>`__

- Fixed an issue when creating a :class:`qiskit.result.Counts` object from an
  empty data dictionary. Now this will create an empty
  :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object. The
  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Counts.most_frequent` method is also updated to raise
  a more descriptive exception when the object is empty. Fixes
  `#5017 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5017>`__

- Fixes a bug where setting ``ctrl_state`` of a
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UnitaryGate` would be applied twice; once
  in the creation of the matrix for the controlled unitary and again
  when calling the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.definition` method of
  the :class:`qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` class. This would give the
  appearence that setting ``ctrl_state`` had no effect.

- Previously the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.inverse` would not preserve the
  ``ctrl_state`` parameter in some cases. This has been fixed so that
  calling :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.inverse` will preserve
  the value ``ctrl_state`` in its output.

- Fixed a bug in the ``mpl`` output backend of the circuit drawer
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` that would
  cause the drawer to fail if the ``style`` kwarg was set to a string.
  The correct behavior would be to treat that string as a path to
  a JSON file containing the style sheet for the visualization. This has
  been fixed, and warnings are raised if the JSON file for the style
  sheet can't be loaded.

- Fixed an error where loading a QASM file via
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file` or
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` would fail
  if a ``u``, ``phase(p)``, ``sx``, or ``sxdg`` gate were present in
  the QASM file.
  Fixes `#5156 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5151>`__

- Fixed a bug that would potentially cause registers to be mismapped when
  unrolling/decomposing a gate defined with only one 2-qubit operation.

Aer 0.7.0
=========

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This 0.7.0 release includes numerous performance improvements and significant
enhancements to the simulator interface, and drops support for Python 3.5. The
main interface changes are configurable simulator backends, and constructing
preconfigured simulators from IBMQ backends. Noise model an basis gate support
has also been extended for most of the Qiskit circuit library standard gates,
including new support for 1 and 2-qubit rotation gates. Performance
improvements include adding SIMD support to the density matrix and unitary
simulation methods, reducing the used memory and improving the performance of
circuits using statevector and density matrix snapshots, and adding support
for Kraus instructions to the gate fusion circuit optimization for greatly
improving the performance of noisy statevector simulations.

.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Adds basis gate support for the :class:`qiskit.circuit.Delay`
  instruction to the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.
  Note that this gate is treated as an identity gate during simulation
  and the delay length parameter is ignored.

- Adds basis gate support for the single-qubit gate
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.UGate` to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"``, ``"density_matrix"``, ``"matrix_product_state"``,
  and ``"extended_stabilizer"`` methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds basis gate support for the phase gate
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseGate` to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"``, ``"density_matrix"``, ``"matrix_product_state"``,
  and ``"extended_stabilizer"`` methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds basis gate support for the controlled-phase gate
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.CPhaseGate` to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"``, ``"density_matrix"``, and
  ``"matrix_product_state"`` methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds support for the multi-controlled phase gate
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.MCPhaseGate` to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds support for the :math:`\sqrt(X)` gate
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.SXGate` to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds support for 1 and 2-qubit Qiskit circuit library rotation gates
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RXGate`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RYGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RZGate`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RXXGate`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RYYGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RZZGate`, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RZXGate`
  to the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"`` and ``"density_matrix"`` methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds support for multi-controlled rotation gates ``"mcr"``, ``"mcrx"``,
  ``"mcry"``, ``"mcrz"``
  to the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and the
  ``"statevector"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Make simulator backends configurable. This allows setting persistant options
  such as simulation method and noise model for each simulator backend object.

  The :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator` can also be configured from
  an :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend` backend object using the
  `:meth:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator.from_backend` method.
  For the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` this will configure the coupling map,
  basis gates, and basic device noise model based on the backend configuration and
  properties. For the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator` the system model
  and defaults will be configured automatically from the backend configuration, properties and
  defaults.

  For example a noisy density matrix simulator backend can be constructed as
  ``QasmSimulator(method='density_matrix', noise_model=noise_model)``, or an ideal
  matrix product state simulator as ``QasmSimulator(method='matrix_product_state')``.

  A benefit is that a :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator` instance configured from
  a backend better serves as a drop-in replacement to the original backend, making it easier to
  swap in and out a simulator and real backend, e.g. when testing code on a simulator before
  using a real backend.
  For example, in the following code-block, the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator` is
  instantiated from the ``FakeArmonk()`` backend. All configuration and default data is copied
  into the simulator instance, and so when it is passed as an argument to ``assemble``,
  it behaves as if the original backend was supplied (e.g. defaults from ``FakeArmonk`` will be
  present and used by ``assemble``).

  .. code-block:: python

      armonk_sim = qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator.from_backend(FakeArmonk())
      pulse_qobj = assemble(schedules, backend=armonk_sim)
      armonk_sim.run(pulse_qobj)

  While the above example is small, the demonstrated 'drop-in replacement' behavior should
  greatly improve the usability in more complicated work-flows, e.g. when calibration experiments
  are constructed using backend attributes.

- Adds support for qobj global phase to the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, and statevector
  methods of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Improves general noisy statevector simulation performance by adding a Kraus
  method to the gate fusion circuit optimization that allows applying gate
  fusion to noisy statevector simulations with general Kraus noise.

- Use move semantics for statevector and density matrix snapshots for the
  `"statevector"` and `"density_matrix"` methods of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` if they are the final
  instruction in a circuit. This reduces the memory usage of the
  simulator improves the performance by avoiding copying a large array in
  the results.

- Adds support for general Kraus
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.QauntumError` gate errors in the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel` to the
  ``"matrix_product_state"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Adds support for density matrix snapshot instruction
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotDensityMatrix` to the
  ``"matrix_product_state"`` method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Extends the SIMD vectorization of the statevector simulation method to the
  unitary matrix, superoperator matrix, and density matrix simulation methods.
  This gives roughtly a 2x performance increase general simulation using the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`, the ``"density_matrix"``
  method of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`, gate
  fusion, and noise simulation.

- Adds a custom vector class to C++ code that has better integration with
  Pybind11. This haves the memory requirement of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` by avoiding an
  memory copy during Python binding of the final simulator state.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- AER now uses Lapack to perform some matrix related computations.
  It uses the Lapack library bundled with OpenBlas (already available
  in Linux and Macos typical OpenBlas dsitributions; Windows version
  distributed with AER) or with the accelerate framework in MacOS.

- The deprecated support for running qiskit-aer with Python 3.5 has
  been removed. To use qiskit-aer >=0.7.0 you will now need at
  least Python 3.6. If you are using Python 3.5 the last version which will
  work is qiskit-aer 0.6.x.

- Updates gate fusion default thresholds so that gate fusion will be applied
  to circuits with of more than 14 qubits for statevector simulations on the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

  For the ``"density_matrix"``
  method of the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` gate fusion will be applied
  to circuits with more than 7 qubits.

  Custom qubit threshold values can be set using the ``fusion_threshold``
  backend option ie ``backend.set_options(fusion_threshold=10)``

- Changes ``fusion_threshold`` backend option to apply fusion when the
  number of qubits is above the threshold, not equal or above the threshold,
  to match the behavior of the OpenMP qubit threshold parameter.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.set_x90_single_qubit_gates` has
  been deprecated as unrolling to custom basis gates has been added to the
  qiskit transpiler. The correct way to use an X90 based noise model is to
  define noise on the Sqrt(X) ``"sx"`` or ``"rx"`` gate and one of the single-qubit
  phase gates ``"u1"``, ``"rx"``, or ``"p"`` in the noise model.

- The ``variance`` kwarg of Snapshot instructions has been deprecated. This
  function computed the sample variance in the snapshot due to noise model
  sampling, not the variance due to measurement statistics so was often
  being used incorrectly. If noise modeling variance is required single shot
  snapshots should be used so variance can be computed manually in
  post-processing.


.. _Release Notes_Aer_0.7.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes bug in the :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` that
  caused it to always run as CPU with double-precision without SIMD/AVX2
  support even on systems with AVX2, or when single-precision or the GPU
  method was specified in the backend options.

- Fixes some for-loops in C++ code that were iterating over copies
  rather than references of container elements.

- Fixes a bug where snapshot data was always copied from C++ to Python rather
  than moved where possible. This will halve memory usage and improve simulation
  time when using large statevector or density matrix snapshots.

- Fix `State::snapshot_pauli_expval` to return correct Y
  expectation value in stabilizer simulator. Refer to
  `#895 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aer/issues/895>`
  for more details.

- The controller_execute wrappers have been adjusted to be functors (objects)
  rather than free functions. Among other things, this allows them to be used
  in multiprocessing.pool.map calls.

- Add missing available memory checks for the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` and
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator`. This throws an exception if
  the memory required to simulate the number of qubits in a circuit exceeds the
  available memory of the system.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.0:

Ignis 0.5.0
===========

.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release includes a new module for expectation value measurement error
mitigation, improved plotting functionality for quantum volume experiments,
several bug fixes, and drops support for Python 3.5.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function allows an optional input of gate objects as `interleaved_elem`.
  In addition, the CNOT-Dihedral class
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CNOTDihedral`
  has a new method `to_instruction`, and the existing `from_circuit` method has
  an optional input of an `Instruction` (in addition to `QuantumCircuit`).

- The :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CNOTDihedral`
  now contains the following new features.
  Initialization from various types of objects:
  `CNOTDihedral`, `ScalarOp`, `QuantumCircuit`, `Instruction` and `Pauli`.
  Converting to a matrix using `to_matrix` and to an operator using `to_operator`.
  Tensor product methods `tensor` and `expand`.
  Calculation of the adjoint, conjugate and transpose using `conjugate`, `adjoint`
  and `transpose` methods.
  Verify that an element is CNOTDihedral using `is_cnotdihedral` method.
  Decomposition method `to_circuit` of a CNOTDihedral element into a circuit
  was extended to allow any number of qubits, based on the function
  `decompose_cnotdihedral_general`.

- Adds expectation value measurement error mitigation to the mitigation module.
  This supports using *complete* N-qubit assignment matrix, single-qubit
  *tensored* assignment matrix, or *continuous time Markov process (CTMP)* [1]
  measurement error mitigation when computing expectation values of diagonal
  operators from counts dictionaries. Expectation values are computed using
  the using the :func:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.expectation_value` function.

  Calibration circuits for calibrating a measurement error mitigator are
  generated using the :func:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.expval_meas_mitigator_circuits`
  function, and the result fitted using the
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.ExpvalMeasMitigatorFitter` class. The
  fitter returns a mitigator object can the be supplied as an argument to the
  :func:`~qiskit.ignis.mitigation.expectation_value` function to apply mitigation.

  [1] S Bravyi, S Sheldon, A Kandala, DC Mckay, JM Gambetta,
      *Mitigating measurement errors in multi-qubit experiments*,
      arXiv:2006.14044 [quant-ph].

  Example:

      The following example shows calibrating a 5-qubit expectation value
      measurement error mitigator using the ``'tensored'`` method.

      .. code-block::

          from qiskit import execute
          from qiskit.test.mock import FakeVigo
          import qiskit.ignis.mitigation as mit

          backend = FakeVigo()
          num_qubits = backend.configuration().num_qubits

          # Generate calibration circuits
          circuits, metadata = mit.expval_meas_mitigator_circuits(
              num_qubits, method='tensored')
          result = execute(circuits, backend, shots=8192).result()

          # Fit mitigator
          mitigator = mit.ExpvalMeasMitigatorFitter(result, metadata).fit()

          # Plot fitted N-qubit assignment matrix
          mitigator.plot_assignment_matrix()

      The following shows how to use the above mitigator to apply measurement
      error mitigation to expectation value computations

      .. code-block::

          from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

          # Test Circuit with expectation value -1.
          qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
          qc.x(range(num_qubits))
          qc.measure_all()

          # Execute
          shots = 8192
          seed_simulator = 1999
          result = execute(qc, backend, shots=8192, seed_simulator=1999).result()
          counts = result.get_counts(0)

          # Expectation value of Z^N without mitigation
          expval_nomit, error_nomit = mit.expectation_value(counts)
          print('Expval (no mitigation): {:.2f} \u00B1 {:.2f}'.format(
              expval_nomit, error_nomit))

          # Expectation value of Z^N with mitigation
          expval_mit, error_mit = mit.expectation_value(counts,
              meas_mitigator=mitigator)
          print('Expval (with mitigation): {:.2f} \u00B1 {:.2f}'.format(
              expval_mit, error_mit))


- Adds Numba as an optional dependency. Numba is used to significantly increase
  the performance of the :class:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.CTMPExpvalMeasMitigator`
  class used for expectation value measurement error mitigation with the CTMP
  method.


- Add two methods to :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter`.

  * :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.calc_z_value` to
    calculate z value in standard normal distribution using mean and standard
    deviation sigma. If sigma = 0, it raises a warning and assigns a small
    value (1e-10) for sigma so that the code still runs.
  * :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.calc_confidence_level`
    to calculate confidence level using z value.


- Store confidence level even when hmean < 2/3 in
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.qv_success`.

- Add explanations for how to calculate statistics based on binomial
  distribution in
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.calc_statistics`.

- The :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter.plot_qv_data` has been updated to return a
  ``matplotlib.Figure`` object. Previously, it would not return anything. By returning a figure
  this makes it easier to integrate the visualizations into a larger ``matplotlib`` workflow.

- The error bars in the figure produced by the
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter` method
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter.plot_qv_data` has been updated to represent
  two-sigma confidence intervals. Previously, the error bars represent one-sigma confidence
  intervals. The success criteria of Quantum Volume benchmarking requires heavy output
  probability > 2/3 with one-sided two-sigma confidence (~97.7%). Changing error bars to
  represent two-sigma confidence intervals allows easily identification of success in the
  figure.

- A new kwarg, ``figsize`` has been added to the
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter` method
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.QVFitter.plot_qv_data`. This kwarg takes in a tuple of the
  form ``(x, y)`` where ``x`` and ``y`` are the dimension in inches to make the generated
  plot.

- The :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.plot_hop_accumulative` method
  has been added to plot heavy output probability (HOP) vs number of trials similar to
  Figure 2a of Quantum Volume 64 paper (`arXiv:2008.08571 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08571>`_).
  HOP of individual trials are plotted as scatters and cummulative HOP are plotted in red line.
  Two-sigma confidence intervals are plotted as shaded area and 2/3 success threshold is plotted
  as dashed line.

- The :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.plot_qv_trial` method
  has been added to plot individual trials, leveraging on the
  :meth:`qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram` method from Qiskit Terra.
  Bitstring counts are plotted as overlapping histograms for ideal (hollow) and experimental
  (filled) values.
  Experimental heavy output probability are shown on the legend.
  Median probability is plotted as red dashed line.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The deprecated support for running qiskit-ignis with Python 3.5 has
  been removed. To use qiskit-ignis >=0.5.0 you will now need at
  least Python 3.6. If you are using Python 3.5 the last version which will
  work is qiskit-ignis 0.4.x.


.. _Release Notes_Ignis_0.5.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------


- Fixing a bug in the class
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CNOTDihedral`
  for elements with more than 5 quits.

- Fix the confidence level threshold for
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.quantum_volume.QVFitter.qv_success` to 0.977
  corresponding to z = 2 as defined by the QV paper Algorithm 1.

- Fix a bug at
  :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  which caused all the subsystems with the same size in the given rb_pattern to
  have the same gates when a 'rand_seed' parameter was given to the function.

Aqua 0.8.0
==========

.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This release introduces an interface for running the available methods for
Bosonic problems. In particular we introduced a full interface for running
vibronic structure calculations.

This release introduces an interface for excited states calculations. It is
now easier for the user to create a general excited states calculation.
This calculation is based on a Driver which provides the relevant information
about the molecule, a Transformation which provides the information about the
mapping of the problem into a qubit Hamiltonian, and finally a Solver.
The Solver is the specific way which the excited states calculation is done
(the algorithm). This structure follows the one of the ground state
calculations. The results are modified to take lists of expectation values
instead of a single one. The QEOM and NumpyEigensolver are adapted to the new
structure. A factory is introduced to run a numpy eigensolver with a specific
filter  (to target states of specific symmetries).

VQE expectation computation with Aer qasm_simulator now defaults to a
computation that has the expected shot noise behavior.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Introduced an option `warm_start` that should be used when tuning other options does not help.
  When this option is enabled, a relaxed problem (all variables are continuous) is solved first
  and the solution is used to initialize the state of the optimizer before it starts the
  iterative process in the `solve` method.

- The amplitude estimation algorithms now use ``QuantumCircuit`` objects as
  inputs to specify the A- and Q operators. This change goes along with the
  introduction of the ``GroverOperator`` in the circuit library, which allows
  an intuitive and fast construction of different Q operators.
  For example, a Bernoulli-experiment can now be constructed as

  .. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.aqua.algorithms import AmplitudeEstimation

    probability = 0.5
    angle = 2 * np.sqrt(np.arcsin(probability))
    a_operator = QuantumCircuit(1)
    a_operator.ry(angle, 0)

    # construct directly
    q_operator = QuantumCircuit(1)
    q_operator.ry(2 * angle, 0)

    # construct via Grover operator
    from qiskit.circuit.library import GroverOperator
    oracle = QuantumCircuit(1)
    oracle.z(0)  # good state = the qubit is in state |1>
    q_operator = GroverOperator(oracle, state_preparation=a_operator)

    # use default construction in QAE
    q_operator = None

    ae = AmplitudeEstimation(a_operator, q_operator)

- Add the possibility to compute Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) expectation
  values.

  Given a diagonal observable H, often corresponding to the objective function
  of an optimization problem, we are often not as interested in minimizing the
  average energy of our observed measurements. In this context, we are
  satisfied if at least some of our measurements achieve low energy. (Note that
  this is emphatically not the case for chemistry problems).

  To this end, one might consider using the best observed sample as a cost
  function during variational optimization. The issue here, is that this can
  result in a non-smooth optimization surface. To resolve this issue, we can
  smooth the optimization surface by using not just the best observed sample,
  but instead average over some fraction of best observed samples. This is
  exactly what the CVaR estimator accomplishes [1].

  Let :math:`\alpha` be a real number in :math:`[0,1]` which specifies the
  fraction of best observed samples which are used to compute the objective
  function. Observe that if :math:`\alpha = 1`, CVaR is equivalent to a
  standard expectation value. Similarly, if :math:`\alpha = 0`, then CVaR
  corresponds to using the best observed sample. Intermediate values of
  :math:`\alpha` interpolate between these two objective functions.

  The functionality to use CVaR is included into the operator flow through a
  new subclass of OperatorStateFn called CVaRMeasurement. This new StateFn
  object is instantied in the same way as an OperatorMeasurement with the
  exception that it also accepts an `alpha` parameter and that it automatically
  enforces the  `is_measurement` attribute to be True. Observe that it is
  unclear what a CVaRStateFn would represent were it not a measurement.

  Examples::

          qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
          qc.h(0)
          op = CVaRMeasurement(Z, alpha=0.5) @ CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.0)
          result = op.eval()


  Similarly, an operator corresponding to a standard expectation value can be
  converted into a CVaR expectation using the CVaRExpectation converter.

  Examples::

          qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
          qc.h(0)
          op = ~StateFn(Z) @ CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.0)
          cvar_expecation = CVaRExpectation(alpha=0.1).convert(op)
          result = cvar_expecation.eval()

  See [1] for additional details regarding this technique and it's empircal
  performance.

  References:

      [1]: Barkoutsos, P. K., Nannicini, G., Robert, A., Tavernelli, I., and Woerner, S.,
           "Improving Variational Quantum Optimization using CVaR"
           `arXiv:1907.04769 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04769>`_

- New  interface ``Eigensolver`` for Eigensolver algorithms.

- An interface for excited states calculation has been added to the chemistry module.
  It is now easier for the user to create a general excited states calculation.
  This calculation is based on a ``Driver`` which provides the relevant information
  about the molecule, a ``Transformation`` which provides the information about the
  mapping of the problem into a qubit Hamiltonian, and finally a Solver.
  The Solver is the specific way which the excited states calculation is done
  (the algorithm). This structure follows the one of the ground state calculations.
  The results are modified to take lists of expectation values instead of a single one.
  The ``QEOM`` and ``NumpyEigensolver`` are adapted to the new structure.
  A factory is introduced to run a numpy eigensolver with a specific filter
  (to target states of specific symmetries).

- In addition to the workflows for solving Fermionic problems, interfaces for calculating
  Bosonic ground and excited states have been added. In particular we introduced a full
  interface for running vibronic structure calculations.

- The ``OrbitalOptimizationVQE`` has been added as new ground state solver in the chemistry
  module. This solver allows for the simulatneous optimization of the variational parameters
  and the orbitals of the molecule. The algorithm is introduced in Sokolov et al.,
  The Journal of Chemical Physics 152 (12).

- A new algorithm has been added: the Born Openheimer Potential Energy surface for the calculation
  of potential energy surface along different degrees of freedom of the molecule. The algorithm
  is called ``BOPESSampler``. It further provides functionalities of fitting the potential energy
  surface to an analytic function of predefined potentials.

- A feasibility check of the obtained solution has been added to all optimizers in the
  optimization stack. This has been implemented by adding two new methods to ``QuadraticProgram``:
  * ``get_feasibility_info(self, x: Union[List[float], np.ndarray])`` accepts an array and returns
  whether this solution is feasible and a list of violated variables(violated bounds) and
  a list of violated constraints.
  * ``is_feasible(self, x: Union[List[float], np.ndarray])`` accepts an array and returns whether
  this solution is feasible or not.

- Add circuit-based versions of ``FixedIncomeExpectedValue``, ``EuropeanCallDelta``,
  ``GaussianConditionalIndependenceModel`` and ``EuropeanCallExpectedValue`` to
  ``qiskit.finance.applications``.

- Gradient Framework.
  :class:`qiskit.operators.gradients`
  Given an operator that represents either a quantum state resp. an expectation
  value, the gradient framework enables the evaluation of gradients, natural
  gradients, Hessians, as well as the Quantum Fisher Information.

  Suppose a parameterized quantum state `|() = V()|` with input state
  `|` and parametrized Ansatz `V()`, and an Operator `O()`.

  Gradients: We want to compute :math:`d()|O()|()/ d`
  resp. :math:`d()|O()|()/ d`
  resp. :math:`d()|ii|()/ d`.

  The last case corresponds to the gradient w.r.t. the sampling probabilities
  of `|()`. These gradients can be computed with different methods, i.e. a
  parameter shift, a linear combination of unitaries and a finite difference
  method.

  Examples::

    x = Parameter('x')
    ham = x * X
    a = Parameter('a')

    q = QuantumRegister(1)
    qc = QuantumCircuit(q)
    qc.h(q)
    qc.p(params[0], q[0])
    op = ~StateFn(ham) @ CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.)

    value_dict = {x: 0.1, a: np.pi / 4}

    ham_grad = Gradient(grad_method='param_shift').convert(operator=op, params=[x])
    ham_grad.assign_parameters(value_dict).eval()

    state_grad = Gradient(grad_method='lin_comb').convert(operator=op, params=[a])
    state_grad.assign_parameters(value_dict).eval()

    prob_grad = Gradient(grad_method='fin_diff').convert(operator=CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.),
                                                         params=[a])
    prob_grad.assign_parameters(value_dict).eval()

  Hessians: We want to compute :math:`d^2()|O()|()/ d^2`
  resp. :math:`d^2()|O()|()/ d^2`
  resp. :math:`d^2()|O()|()/ dd`
  resp. :math:`d^2()|ii|()/ d^2`.

  The last case corresponds to the Hessian w.r.t. the sampling probabilities of `|()`.
  Just as the first order gradients, the Hessians can be evaluated with
  different methods, i.e. a parameter shift, a linear combination of unitaries
  and a finite difference method. Given a tuple of parameters
  ``Hessian().convert(op, param_tuple)`` returns the value for the second order
  derivative. If a list of parameters is given ``Hessian().convert(op, param_list)``
  returns the full Hessian for all the given parameters according to the given
  parameter order.

  QFI: The Quantum Fisher Information `QFI` is a metric tensor which is
  representative for the representation capacity of a parameterized quantum
  state `|() = V()|` generated by an input state `|` and a
  parametrized Ansatz `V()`. The entries of the `QFI` for a pure state read
  :math:`[QFI]kl= Re[k|lk||l] * 4`.

  Just as for the previous derivative types, the QFI can be computed using
  different methods: a full representation based on a linear combination of
  unitaries implementation, a block-diagonal and a diagonal representation
  based on an overlap method.

  Examples::

    q = QuantumRegister(1)
    qc = QuantumCircuit(q)
    qc.h(q)
    qc.p(params[0], q[0])
    op = ~StateFn(ham) @ CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.)

    value_dict = {x: 0.1, a: np.pi / 4}
    qfi = QFI('lin_comb_full').convert(operator=CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.), params=[a])
    qfi.assign_parameters(value_dict).eval()


  The combination of the QFI and the gradient lead to a special form of a
  gradient, namely

  NaturalGradients: The natural gradient is a special gradient method which
  rescales a gradient w.r.t. a state parameter with the inverse of the
  corresponding Quantum Fisher Information (QFI)
  :math:`QFI^-1 d()|O()|()/ d`.
  Hereby, we can choose a gradient as well as a QFI method and a
  regularization method which is used together with a least square solver
  instead of exact invertion of the QFI:

  Examples::

    op = ~StateFn(ham) @ CircuitStateFn(primitive=qc, coeff=1.)
    nat_grad = NaturalGradient(grad_method='lin_comb, qfi_method='lin_comb_full', \
                               regularization='ridge').convert(operator=op, params=params)

  The gradient framework is also compatible with the optimizers from
  `qiskit.aqua.components.optimizers`. The derivative classes come with a
  `gradient_wrapper()` function which returns the corresponding callable.

- Introduces ``transformations`` for the fermionic and bosonic transformation of a problem
  instance. Transforms the fermionic operator to qubit operator. Respective class for the
  transformation is ``fermionic_transformation``
  Introduces in algorithms ``ground_state_solvers`` for the calculation of ground state
  properties. The calculation can be done either using an ``MinimumEigensolver`` or using
  ``AdaptVQE``
  Introduces ``chemistry/results`` where the eigenstate_result and the
  electronic_structure_result are also used for the algorithms.
  Introduces Minimum Eigensolver factories ``minimum_eigensolver_factories`` where chemistry
  specific minimum eigensolvers can be initialized Introduces orbital optimization vqe
  ``oovqe`` as a ground state solver for chemistry applications

- New Algorithm result classes:

  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.Grover` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.Grover._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.GroverResult`.
  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.AmplitudeEstimation` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.AmplitudeEstimation._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.AmplitudeEstimationResult`.
  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.IterativeAmplitudeEstimation` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.IterativeAmplitudeEstimation._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.IterativeAmplitudeEstimationResult`.
  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.MaximumLikelihoodAmplitudeEstimation` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.MaximumLikelihoodAmplitudeEstimation._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.MaximumLikelihoodAmplitudeEstimationResult`.

  All new result classes are backwards compatible with previous result dictionary.

- New Linear Solver result classes:

  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.HHL` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.HHL._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.HHLResult`.
  :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.NumPyLSsolver` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.NumPyLSsolver._run`
  returns class :class:`~qiskit.aqua.algorithms.NumPyLSsolverResult`.

  All new result classes are backwards compatible with previous result dictionary.

- ``MinimumEigenOptimizationResult`` now exposes properties: ``samples`` and
  ``eigensolver_result``. The latter is obtained from the underlying algorithm used by the
  optimizer and specific to the algorithm.
  ``RecursiveMinimumEigenOptimizer`` now returns an instance of the result class
  ``RecursiveMinimumEigenOptimizationResult`` which in turn may contains intermediate results
  obtained from the underlying algorithms. The dedicated result class exposes properties
  ``replacements`` and ``history`` that are specific to this optimizer. The depth of the history
  is managed by the ``history`` parameter of the optimizer.

- ``GroverOptimizer`` now returns an instance of ``GroverOptimizationResult`` and this result
  class exposes properties ``operation_counts``, ``n_input_qubits``, and ``n_output_qubits``
  directly. These properties are not available in the ``raw_results`` dictionary anymore.

- ``SlsqpOptimizer`` now returns an instance of ``SlsqpOptimizationResult`` and this result class
  exposes additional properties specific to the SLSQP implementation.

- Support passing ``QuantumCircuit`` objects as generator circuits into
  the ``QuantumGenerator``.

- Removes the restriction to real input vectors in CircuitStateFn.from_vector.
  The method calls extensions.Initialize. The latter explicitly supports (in API
  and documentation) complex input vectors. So this restriction seems unnecessary.

- Simplified `AbelianGrouper` using a graph coloring algorithm of retworkx.
  It is faster than the numpy-based coloring algorithm.

- Allow calling ``eval`` on state function objects with no argument, which returns the
  ``VectorStateFn`` representation of the state function.
  This is consistent behavior with ``OperatorBase.eval``, which returns the
  ``MatrixOp`` representation, if no argument is passed.

- Adds ``max_iterations`` to the ``VQEAdapt`` class in order to allow
  limiting the maximum number of iterations performed by the algorithm.

- VQE expectation computation with Aer qasm_simulator now defaults to a
  computation that has the expected shot noise behavior. The special Aer
  snapshot based computation, that is much faster, with the ideal output
  similar to state vector simulator, may still be chosen but like before
  Aqua 0.7 it now no longer defaults to this but can be chosen.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Extension of the previous Analytic Quantum Gradient Descent (AQGD) classical
  optimizer with the AQGD with Epochs. Now AQGD performs the gradient descent
  optimization with a momentum term, analytic gradients, and an added customized
  step length schedule for parametrized quantum gates. Gradients are computed
  "analytically" using the quantum circuit when evaluating the objective function.


- The deprecated support for running qiskit-aqua with Python 3.5 has
  been removed. To use qiskit-aqua >=0.8.0 you will now need at
  least Python 3.6. If you are using Python 3.5 the last version which will
  work is qiskit-aqua 0.7.x.

- Added retworkx as a new dependency.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The ``i_objective`` argument of the amplitude estimation algorithms has been
  renamed to ``objective_qubits``.

- TransformationType

- QubitMappingType

- Deprecate the ``CircuitFactory`` and derived types. The ``CircuitFactory`` has
  been introduced as temporary class when the ``QuantumCircuit`` missed some
  features necessary for applications in Aqua. Now that the circuit has all required
  functionality, the circuit factory can be removed.
  The replacements are shown in the following table.

  .. code-block::

      Circuit factory class               | Replacement
      ------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------
      CircuitFactory                      | use QuantumCircuit
                                          |
      UncertaintyModel                    | -
      UnivariateDistribution              | -
      MultivariateDistribution            | -
      NormalDistribution                  | qiskit.circuit.library.NormalDistribution
      MultivariateNormalDistribution      | qiskit.circuit.library.NormalDistribution
      LogNormalDistribution               | qiskit.circuit.library.LogNormalDistribution
      MultivariateLogNormalDistribution   | qiskit.circuit.library.LogNormalDistribution
      UniformDistribution                 | qiskit.circuit.library.UniformDistribution
      MultivariateUniformDistribution     | qiskit.circuit.library.UniformDistribution
      UnivariateVariationalDistribution   | use parameterized QuantumCircuit
      MultivariateVariationalDistribution | use parameterized QuantumCircuit
                                          |
      UncertaintyProblem                  | -
      UnivariateProblem                   | -
      MultivariateProblem                 | -
      UnivariatePiecewiseLinearObjective  | qiskit.circuit.library.LinearAmplitudeFunction

- The ising convert classes
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.converters.QuadraticProgramToIsing` and
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.converters.IsingToQuadraticProgram` have
  been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead the
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram.to_ising` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticPrgraom.from_ising` should be used
  instead.

- Deprecate the ``WeightedSumOperator`` which has been ported to the circuit library as
  ``WeightedAdder`` in ``qiskit.circuit.library``.

- ``Core Hamiltonian`` class is deprecated in favor of the ``FermionicTransformation``
  ``Chemistry Operator`` class is deprecated in favor of the ``tranformations``
  ``minimum_eigen_solvers/vqe_adapt`` is also deprecated and moved as an implementation
  of the ground_state_solver interface
  ``applications/molecular_ground_state_energy`` is deprecated in favor of ``ground_state_solver``

- ``Optimizer.SupportLevel`` nested enum is replaced by ``OptimizerSupportLevel``
  and ``Optimizer.SupportLevel`` was removed. Use, for example,
  ``OptimizerSupportLevel.required`` instead of ``Optimizer.SupportLevel.required``.

- Deprecate the ``UnivariateVariationalDistribution`` and
  ``MultivariateVariationalDistribution`` as input
  to the ``QuantumGenerator``. Instead, plain ``QuantumCircuit`` objects can
  be used.

- Ignored `fast` and `use_nx` options of `AbelianGrouper.group_subops` to be removed in the
  future release.

- GSLS optimizer class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_iter`` in favor of ``maxiter``.
  SPSA optimizer class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_trials`` in favor of ``maxiter``.
  optimize_svm function deprecated ``max_iters`` parameter in favor of ``maxiter``.
  ADMMParameters class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_iter`` in favor of ``maxiter``.


.. _Release Notes_Aqua_0.8.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------


- The UCCSD excitation list, comprising single and double excitations, was not being
  generated correctly when an active space was explicitly provided to UCSSD via the
  active_(un)occupied parameters.

- For the amplitude estimation algorithms, we define the number of oracle queries
  as number of times the Q operator/Grover operator is applied. This includes
  the number of shots. That factor has been included in MLAE and IQAE but
  was missing in the 'standard' QAE.

- Fix CircuitSampler.convert, so that the ``is_measurement`` property is
  propagated to converted StateFns.

- Fix double calculation of coefficients in
  :meth`~qiskit.aqua.operators.VectorStateFn.to_circuit_op`.

- Calling PauliTrotterEvolution.convert on an operator including a term that
  is a scalar multiple of the identity gave an incorrect circuit, one that
  ignored the scalar coefficient. This fix includes the effect of the
  coefficient in the global_phase property of the circuit.

- Make ListOp.num_qubits check that all ops in list have the same num_qubits
  Previously, the number of qubits in the first operator in the ListOp
  was returned. With this change, an additional check is made that all
  other operators also have the same number of qubits.

- Make PauliOp.exp_i() generate the correct matrix with the following changes.
  1) There was previously an error in the phase of a factor of 2.
  2) The global phase was ignored when converting the circuit
  to a matrix. We now use qiskit.quantum_info.Operator, which is
  generally useful for converting a circuit to a unitary matrix,
  when possible.

- Fixes the cyclicity detection as reported buggy in
  https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1184.


IBM Q Provider 0.11.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_IBMQ_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The deprecated support for running qiskit-ibmq-provider with Python 3.5 has
  been removed. To use qiskit-ibmq-provider >=0.11.0 you will now need at
  least Python 3.6. If you are using Python 3.5 the last version which will
  work is qiskit-ibmq-provider 0.10.x.

- Prior to this release, ``websockets`` 7.0 was used for Python 3.6.
  With this release, ``websockets`` 8.0 or above is required for all Python versions.
  The package requirements have been updated to reflect this.


*************
Qiskit 0.22.0
*************

Terra 0.15.2
============

No change

Aer 0.6.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.4.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.7.5
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.10.0
=====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_provider_0.10.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- CQC randomness extractors can now be invoked asynchronously, using methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.random.CQCExtractor.run_async_ext1` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.random.CQCExtractor.run_async_ext2`. Each of
  these methods returns a :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.random.CQCExtractorJob`
  instance that allows you to check on the job status (using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.random.CQCExtractorJob.status`) and wait for
  its result (using
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.random.CQCExtractorJob.block_until_ready`).
  The :meth:`qiskit.provider.ibmq.random.CQCExtractor.run` method remains
  synchronous.

- You can now use the new IBMQ experiment service to query, retrieve, and
  download experiment related data. Interface to this service is located
  in the new :mod:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.experiment` package.
  Note that this feature is still in
  beta, and not all accounts have access to it. It is also subject to heavy
  modification in both functionality and API without backward compatibility.

- Two Jupyter magic functions, the IQX dashboard and the backend widget, are
  updated to display backend reservations. If a backend has reservations
  scheduled in the next 24 hours, time to the next one and its duration
  are displayed (e.g. ``Reservation: in 6 hrs 30 min (60m)``). If there is
  a reservation and the backend is active, the backend status is displayed
  as ``active [R]``.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_provider_0.10.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Starting from this release, the `basis_gates` returned by
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.configuration` may differ for each backend.
  You should update your program if it relies on the basis gates being
  ``['id','u1','u2','u3','cx']``. We recommend always using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.configuration` method to find backend
  configuration values instead of hard coding them.

- ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` release 0.10 requires ``qiskit-terra``
  release 0.15 or above. The package metadata has been updated to reflect
  the new dependency.

*************
Qiskit 0.21.0
*************

Terra 0.15.2
============

No change

Aer 0.6.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.4.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.7.5
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.9.0
====================

.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_provider_0.9.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- You can now access the IBMQ random number services, such as the CQC
  randomness extractor, using the new package
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.random`. Note that this feature is still in
  beta, and not all accounts have access to it. It is also subject to heavy
  modification in both functionality and API without backward compatibility.


.. _Release Notes_IBMQ_provider_0.9.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes an issue that may raise a ``ValueError`` if
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.retrieve_job` is used to retrieve
  a job submitted via the IBM Quantum Experience Composer.

- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager` has been updated so
  that if a time out happens while waiting for an old job to finish, the
  time out error doesn't prevent a new job to be submitted. Fixes
  `#737 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/737>`_


*************
Qiskit 0.20.1
*************

Terra 0.15.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.15.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- When accessing the ``definition`` attribute of a parameterized ``Gate``
  instance, the generated ``QuantumCircuit`` had been generated with an invalid
  ``ParameterTable``, such that reading from ``QuantumCircuit.parameters`` or
  calling ``QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters`` would incorrectly report the
  unbound parameters. This has been resolved.

- ``SXGate().inverse()`` had previously returned an 'sx_dg' gate with a correct
  ``definition`` but incorrect ``to_matrix``. This has been updated such that
  ``SXGate().inverse()`` returns an ``SXdgGate()`` and vice versa.

- ``Instruction.inverse()``, when not overridden by a subclass, would in some
  cases return a ``Gate`` instance with an incorrect ``to_matrix`` method. The
  instances of incorrect ``to_matrix`` methods have been removed.

- For ``C3XGate`` with a non-zero ``angle``, inverting the gate via
  ``C3XGate.inverse()`` had previously generated an incorrect inverse gate.
  This has been corrected.

- The ``MCXGate`` modes have been updated to return a gate of the same mode
  when calling ``.inverse()``. This resolves an issue where in some cases,
  transpiling a circuit containing the inverse of an ``MCXVChain`` gate would
  raise an error.

- Previously, when creating a multiply controlled phase gate via
  ``PhaseGate.control``, an ``MCU1Gate`` gate had been returned. This has been
  had corrected so that an ``MCPhaseGate`` is returned.

- Previously, attempting to decompose a circuit containing an
  ``MCPhaseGate`` would raise an error due to an inconsistency in the
  definition of the ``MCPhaseGate``. This has been corrected.

- ``QuantumCircuit.compose`` and ``DAGCircuit.compose`` had, in some cases,
  incorrectly translated conditional gates if the input circuit contained
  more than one ``ClassicalRegister``. This has been resolved.

- Fixed an issue when creating a :class:`qiskit.result.Counts` object from an
  empty data dictionary. Now this will create an empty
  :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts` object. The
  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Counts.most_frequent` method is also updated to raise
  a more descriptive exception when the object is empty. Fixes
  `#5017 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/5017>`__

- Extending circuits with differing registers updated the ``qregs`` and
  ``cregs`` properties accordingly, but not the ``qubits`` and ``clbits``
  lists. As these are no longer generated from the registers but are cached
  lists, this lead to a discrepancy of registers and bits. This has been
  fixed and the ``extend`` method explicitly updates the cached bit lists.

- Fix bugs of the concrete implementations of
  meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.inverse` method which do not preserve
  the ``ctrl_state`` parameter.

- A bug was fixed that caused long pulse schedules to throw a recursion error.

Aer 0.6.1
=========

No change

Ignis 0.4.0
===========

No change

Aqua 0.7.5
==========

No change

IBM Q Provider 0.8.0
====================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.20.0
*************

Terra 0.15.1
============

.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------


The 0.15.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. Some
highlights for this release are:

This release includes the introduction of arbitrary
basis translation to the transpiler. This includes support for directly
targeting a broader range of device basis sets, e.g. backends
implementing RZ, RY, RZ, CZ or iSwap gates.

The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class now tracks global
phase. This means controlling a circuit which has global phase now
correctly adds a relative phase, and gate matrix definitions are now
exact rather than equal up to a global phase.


.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_New Features:

New Features
------------


- A new DAG class :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` for representing
  the dependency form of circuit, In this DAG, the nodes are
  operations (gates, measure, barrier, etc...) and the edges corresponds to
  non-commutation between two operations.

- Four new functions are added to :mod:`qiskit.converters` for converting back and
  forth to :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency`. These functions are:

  * :func:`~qiskit.converters.circuit_to_dagdependency` to convert
    from a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object to a
    :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` object.
  * :func:`~qiskit.converters.dagdependency_to_circuit` to convert from a
    :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` object to a
    :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object.
  * :func:`~qiskit.converters.dag_to_dagdependency` to convert from
    a :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` object to a
    :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` object.
  * :func:`~qiskit.converters.dagdependency_to_dag` to convert from
    a :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGDependency` object to a
    :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` object.

  For example::

    from qiskit.converters.dagdependency_to_circuit import dagdependency_to_circuit
    from qiskit import QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister, QuantumCircuit

    circuit_in = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit_in.h(qr[0])
    circuit_in.h(qr[1])

    dag_dependency = circuit_to_dagdependency(circuit_in)
    circuit_out = dagdepency_to_circuit(dag_dependency)

- Two new transpiler passes have been added to :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes`
  The first, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnrollCustomDefinitions`,
  unrolls all instructions in the
  circuit according to their :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Instruction.definition`
  property, stopping when reaching either the specified ``basis_gates``
  or a set of gates in the provided
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary`. The second,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator`, uses the set of
  translations in the provided :class:`~qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary` to
  re-write circuit instructions in a specified basis.

- A new ``translation_method`` keyword argument has been added to
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` to allow selection of the method to be
  used for translating circuits to the available device gates. For example,
  ``transpile(circ, backend, translation_method='translator')``. Valid
  choices are:

  * ``'unroller'``: to use the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Unroller`
    pass
  * ``'translator'``: to use the
    :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` pass.
  * ``'synthesis'``: to use the
    :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnitarySynthesis` pass.

  The  default value is ``'translator'``.

- A new class for handling counts result data, :class:`qiskit.result.Counts`,
  has been added. This class is a subclass of ``dict`` and can be interacted
  with like any other dictionary. But, it includes helper methods and
  attributes for dealing with counts results from experiments and also
  handles post processing and formatting of binary strings at object
  initialization. A :class:`~qiskit.result.Counts`  object can be created by
  passing a dictionary  of counts with the keys being either integers,
  hexadecimal strings of the form ``'0x4a'``,  binary strings of the form
  ``'0b1101'``, a bit string formatted across register and memory slots
  (ie ``'00 10'``), or a dit string. For example::

    from qiskit.result import Counts

    counts = Counts({"0x0': 1, '0x1', 3, '0x2': 1020})

- A new method for constructing :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` objects
  has been added, :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.from_networkx`. This
  method takes in a networkx ``MultiDiGraph`` object (in the format returned
  by :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.to_networkx`) and will return a
  new :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` object. The intent behind this
  function is to enable transpiler pass authors to leverage networkx's
  `graph algorithm library
  <https://networkx.github.io/documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/index.html>`__
  if a function is missing from the
  `retworkx API <https://retworkx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html>`_.
  Although, hopefully in such casses an issue will be opened with
  `retworkx issue tracker <https://github.com/Qiskit/retworkx/issues>`__ (or
  even better a pull request submitted).

- A new kwarg for ``init_qubits`` has been added to
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.assemble` and :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute`.
  For backends that support this feature ``init_qubits`` can be used to
  control whether the backend executing the circuits inserts any
  initialization sequences at the start of each shot. By default this is set
  to ``True`` meaning that all qubits can assumed to be in the ground state
  at the start of each shot. However, when ``init_qubits`` is  set to
  ``False`` qubits will be uninitialized at the start of each
  experiment and between shots. Note, that the backend running the circuits
  has to support this feature for this flag to have any effect.

- A new kwarg ``rep_delay`` has been added to
  :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble`, :func:`qiskit.execute.execute`, and the
  constructor for :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjtConfig`.qiskit
  This new kwarg is used to denotes the time between program executions. It
  must be chosen from the list of valid values set as the
  ``rep_delays`` from a backend's
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` object which
  can be accessed as ``backend.configuration().rep_delays``).

  The ``rep_delay`` kwarg will only work on backends which allow for dynamic
  repetition time. This will also be indicated in the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` object for a
  backend as the ``dynamic_reprate_enabled`` attribute. If
  ``dynamic_reprate_enabled`` is ``False`` then the ``rep_time`` value
  specified for :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble`,
  :func:`qiskit.execute.execute`, or the constructor for
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjtConfig` will be used rather than
  ``rep_delay``. ``rep_time`` only allows users to specify the duration of a
  program, rather than the delay between programs.

- The ``qobj_schema.json`` JSON Schema file in :mod:`qiskit.schemas` has
  been updated to include the ``rep_delay`` as an optional configuration
  property for pulse qobjs.

- The ``backend_configuration_schema.json`` JSON Schema file in
  mod:`qiskit.schemas` has been updated to include ``rep_delay_range`` and
  ``default_rep_delay`` as optional properties for a pulse backend
  configuration.

- A new attribute, :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase`,
  which is is used for tracking the global phase has been added to the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. For example::

    import math

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    circ = QuantumCircuit(1, global_phase=math.pi)
    circ.u1(0)

  The global phase may also be changed or queried with
  ``circ.global_phase`` in the above example. In either case the setting is
  in radians. If the circuit is converted to an instruction or gate the
  global phase is represented by two single qubit rotations on the first
  qubit.

  This allows for other methods and functions which consume a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object to take global phase into
  account. For example. with the
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.global_phase`
  attribute the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.to_matrix` method for a gate
  can now exactly correspond to its decompositions instead of
  just up to a global phase.

  The same attribute has also been added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class so that global phase
  can be tracked when converting between
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` and
  :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`.

- Two new classes, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.AncillaRegister` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.AncillaQubit` have been added to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit` module. These are subclasses of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` and :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Qubit`
  respectively and enable marking qubits being ancillas. This will allow
  these qubits to be re-used in larger circuits and algorithms.

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.control`, has been
  added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. This method will
  return a controlled version of the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
  object, with both open and closed controls. This functionality had
  previously only been accessible via the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate`
  class.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.repeat` has been added
  to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. It returns a new
  circuit object containing a specified number of repetitions of the original
  circuit. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)
    repeated_qc = qc.repeat(3)
    repeated_qc.decompose().draw(output='mpl')

  The parameters are copied by reference, meaning that if you update
  the parameters in one instance of the circuit all repetitions will be
  updated.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_bits` has been
  added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This method
  will reverse the order of bits in a circuit (both quantum and classical
  bits). This can be used to switch a circuit from little-endian to big-endian
  and vice-versa.

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.Layout.combine_into_edge_map()`,
  was added to the :class:`qiskit.transpiler.Layout` class. This method
  enables converting converting two :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Layout` objects
  into a qubit map for composing two circuits.

- A new class, :class:`~qiskit.test.mock.utils.ConfigurableFakeBackend`, has
  been added to the :mod:`qiskit.test.mock.utils` module. This new class
  enables the creation of configurable mock backends for use in testing.
  For example::

      from qiskit.test.mock.utils import ConfigurableFakeBackend

      backend = ConfigurableFakeBackend("Tashkent",
                                        n_qubits=100,
                                        version="0.0.1",
                                        basis_gates=['u1'],
                                        qubit_t1=99.,
                                        qubit_t2=146.,
                                        qubit_frequency=5.,
                                        qubit_readout_error=0.01,
                                        single_qubit_gates=['u1'])

  will create a backend object with 100 qubits and all the other parameters
  specified in the constructor.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary.draw` has been
  added to the :class:`qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary` class. This
  method can be used for drawing the contents of an equivalence library,
  which can be useful for debugging. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from numpy import pi

    from qiskit.circuit import EquivalenceLibrary
    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumRegister
    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
    from qiskit.circuit.library import HGate
    from qiskit.circuit.library import U2Gate
    from qiskit.circuit.library import U3Gate

    my_equiv_library = EquivalenceLibrary()

    q = QuantumRegister(1, 'q')
    def_h = QuantumCircuit(q)
    def_h.append(U2Gate(0, pi), [q[0]], [])
    my_equiv_library.add_equivalence(HGate(), def_h)

    theta = Parameter('theta')
    phi = Parameter('phi')
    lam = Parameter('lam')
    def_u2 = QuantumCircuit(q)
    def_u2.append(U3Gate(pi / 2, phi, lam), [q[0]], [])
    my_equiv_library.add_equivalence(U2Gate(phi, lam), def_u2)

    my_equiv_library.draw()

- A new Phase instruction, :class:`~qiskit.pulse.SetPhase`, has been added
  to :mod:`qiskit.pulse`. This instruction sets the phase of the
  subsequent pulses to the specified phase (in radians. For example::

    import numpy as np

    from qiskit.pulse import DriveChannel
    from qiskit.pulse import Schedule
    from qiskit.pulse import SetPhase

    sched = Schedule()
    sched += SetPhase(np.pi, DriveChannel(0))

  In this example, the phase of the pulses applied to ``DriveChannel(0)``
  after the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.SetPhase` instruction will be set to
  :math:`\pi` radians.

- A new pulse instruction :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ShiftFrequency` has been
  added to :mod:`qiskit.pulse.instructions`. This instruction enables
  shifting the frequency of a channel from its set frequency. For example::

    from qiskit.pulse import DriveChannel
    from qiskit.pulse import Schedule
    from qiskit.pulse import ShiftFrequency

    sched = Schedule()
    sched += ShiftFrequency(-340e6, DriveChannel(0))

  In this example all the pulses applied to ``DriveChannel(0)`` after the
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.ShiftFrequency` command will have the envelope a
  frequency decremented by 340MHz.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression.conjugate` has
  been added to the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` class.
  This enables calling ``numpy.conj()`` without raising an error. Since a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` object is real, it will
  return itself. This behaviour is analogous to Python floats/ints.

- A new class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseEstimation` has been
  added to :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`. This circuit library class is
  the circuit used in the original formulation of the phase estimation
  algorithm in
  `arXiv:quant-ph/9511026 <https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/9511026.pdf>`__.
  Phase estimation is the task to to estimate the phase :math:`\phi` of an
  eigenvalue :math:`e^{2\pi i\phi}` of a unitary operator :math:`U`, provided
  with the corresponding eigenstate :math:`|psi\rangle`. That is

  .. math::

      U|\psi\rangle = e^{2\pi i\phi} |\psi\rangle

  This estimation (and thereby this circuit) is a central routine to several
  well-known algorithms, such as Shor's algorithm or Quantum Amplitude
  Estimation.

- The :mod:`qiskit.visualization` function
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere` has a new kwarg
  ``show_state_labels`` which is used to control whether each blob in the
  qsphere visualization is labeled. By default this kwarg is set to ``True``
  and shows the basis states next to each blob by default. This feature can be
  disabled, reverting to the previous behavior, by setting the
  ``show_state_labels`` kwarg to ``False``.

- The :mod:`qiskit.visualization` function
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere` has a new kwarg
  ``show_state_phases`` which is set to ``False`` by default. When set to
  ``True`` it displays the phase of each basis state.

- The :mod:`qiskit.visualization` function
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere` has a new kwarg
  ``use_degrees`` which is set to ``False`` by default. When set to ``True``
  it displays the phase of each basis state in degrees, along with the phase
  circle at the bottom right.

- A new class, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QuadraticForm` to the
  :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` module for implementing a a quadratic form on
  binary variables. The circuit library element implements the operation

  .. math::

    |x\rangle |0\rangle \mapsto |x\rangle |Q(x) \mod 2^m\rangle

  for the quadratic form :math:`Q` and :math:`m` output qubits.
  The result is in the :math:`m` output qubits is encoded in two's
  complement. If :math:`m` is not specified, the circuit will choose
  the minimal number of qubits required to represent the result
  without applying a modulo operation.
  The quadratic form is specified using a matrix for the quadratic
  terms, a vector for the linear terms and a constant offset.
  If all terms are integers, the circuit implements the quadratic form
  exactly, otherwise it is only an approximation.

  For example::

    import numpy as np

    from qiskit.circuit.library import QuadraticForm

    A = np.array([[1, 2], [-1, 0]])
    b = np.array([3, -3])
    c = -2
    m = 4
    quad_form_circuit = QuadraticForm(m, A, b, c)

- Add :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.expectation_value` and
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.expectation_value` methods for
  computing the expectation value of an :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`.

- For the ``seed`` kwarg in the constructor for
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume` `numpy random Generator
  objects <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generator.html>`__
  can now be used. Previously, only integers were a valid input. This is
  useful when integrating :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume` as
  part of a larger function with its own random number generation, e.g.
  generating a sequence of
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume` circuits.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` has a new kwarg ``front``
  which can be used for prepending the other circuit before the origin
  circuit instead of appending. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circ1 = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circ2 = QuantumCircuit(2)

    circ2.h(0)
    circ1.cx(0, 1)

    circ1.compose(circ2, front=True).draw(output='mpl')

- Two new passes, :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreLayout` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreSwap` for layout and routing have
  been added to :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes`. These new passes are based
  on the algorithm presented in Li et al., "Tackling the Qubit Mapping
  Problem for NISQ-Era Quantum Devices", ASPLOS 2019. They can also be
  selected when using the :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` function by
  setting the ``layout_method`` kwarg to ``'sabre'`` and/or the
  ``routing_method`` to ``'sabre'`` to use
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreLayout` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreSwap` respectively.

- Added the method :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule.replace` to the
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` class which allows a
  pulse instruction to be replaced with another. For example::

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import pulse

    d0 = pulse.DriveChannel(0)

    sched = pulse.Schedule()

    old = pulse.Play(pulse.Constant(100, 1.0), d0)
    new = pulse.Play(pulse.Constant(100, 0.1), d0)

    sched += old

    sched = sched.replace(old, new)

    assert sched == pulse.Schedule(new)

- Added new gate classes to :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` for the
  :math:`\sqrt{X}`, its adjoint :math:`\sqrt{X}^\dagger`, and
  controlled :math:`\sqrt{X}` gates as
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.SXdgGate`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CSXGate`. They can also be added to
  a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` object using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.sx`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.sxdg`, and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.csx` respectively.

- Add support for :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Reset` instructions to
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.from_instruction`. Note that this
  involves RNG sampling in choosing the projection to the zero state in the
  case where the qubit is in a superposition state. The seed for sampling
  can be set using the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.seed` method.

- The methods :meth:`qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression.subs` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters` now
  accept :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression` as the target value
  to be substituted.

  For example,

  .. code-block::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, Parameter

      p = Parameter('p')
      source = QuantumCircuit(1)
      source.rz(p, 0)

      x = Parameter('x')
      source.assign_parameters({p: x*x})

  .. parsed-literal::

           
      q_0:  Rz(x**2) 
           

- The :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.to_gate` has a new kwarg
  ``label`` which can be used to set a label for for the output
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` object. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circuit_gate = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circuit_gate.h(0)
    circuit_gate.cx(0, 1)
    custom_gate = circuit_gate.to_gate(label='My Special Bell')
    new_circ = QuantumCircuit(2)
    new_circ.append(custom_gate, [0, 1], [])
    new_circ.draw(output='mpl')

- Added the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CUGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseGate`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CPhaseGate` with the corresponding
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.u`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cu`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.p`, and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cp`.
  The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.UGate` gate is the generic single qubit
  rotation gate with 3 Euler angles and the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CUGate` gate its controlled version.
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CUGate` has 4 parameters to account for a
  possible global phase of the U gate. The
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PhaseGate` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CPhaseGate` gates are the general Phase
  gate at an arbitrary angle and it's controlled version.

- A new kwarg, ``cregbundle`` has been added to the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw`. When set to ``True`` the
  cregs will be bundled into a single line in circuit visualizations for the
  ``text`` and ``mpl`` drawers. The default value is ``True``.
  Addresses issue `#4290 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4290>`_.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.measure_all()
      circuit.draw(output='mpl', cregbundle=True)

- A new kwarg, ``initial_state`` has been added to the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw`. When set to ``True`` the
  initial state will now be included in circuit visualizations for all drawers.
  Addresses issue `#4293 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4293>`_.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.measure_all()
      circuit.draw(output='mpl', initial_state=True)

- Labels will now be displayed when using the 'mpl' drawer. There are 2
  types of labels - gate labels and control labels. Gate labels will
  replace the gate name in the display. Control labels will display
  above or below the controls for a gate.
  Fixes issues #3766, #4580
  Addresses issues `#3766 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3766>`_
  and `#4580 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4580>`_.

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.circuit.library.standard_gates import YGate
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.append(YGate(label='A Y Gate').control(label='Y Control'), [0, 1])
      circuit.draw(output='mpl')


.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Implementations of the multi-controlled X Gate (
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXGrayCode`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXRecursive`, and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXVChain`) have had their ``name``
  properties changed to more accurately describe their
  implementation: ``mcx_gray``, ``mcx_recursive``, and
  ``mcx_vchain`` respectively. Previously, these gates shared the
  name ``mcx`` with :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.MCXGate`, which caused
  these gates to be incorrectly transpiled and simulated.

- By default the preset passmanagers in
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers` are using
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.UnrollCustomDefinitions` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BasisTranslator` to handle basis changing
  instead of the previous default :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.Unroller`.
  This was done because the new passes are more flexible and allow targeting
  any basis set, however the output may differ. To use the previous default
  you can set the ``translation_method`` kwarg on
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` to ``'unroller'``.

- The :func:`qiskit.converters.circuit_to_gate` and
  :func`qiskit.converters.circuit_to_instruction` converter functions
  had previously automatically included the generated gate or instruction
  in the active ``SessionEquivalenceLibrary``. These converters now accept
  an optional ``equivalence_library`` keyword argument to specify if and
  where the converted instances should be registered. The default behavior
  has changed to not register the converted instance.

- The default value of the ``cregbundle`` kwarg for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function has been changed
  to ``True``. This means that by default the classical bits in the
  circuit diagram will now be bundled by default, for example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circ = QuantumCircuit(4)
    circ.x(0)
    circ.h(1)
    circ.measure_all()
    circ.draw(output='mpl')

  If you want to have your circuit drawing retain the previous behavior
  and show each classical bit in the diagram you can set the ``cregbundle``
  kwarg to ``False``. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit

    circ = QuantumCircuit(4)
    circ.x(0)
    circ.h(1)
    circ.measure_all()
    circ.draw(output='mpl', cregbundle=False)

- :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` plotting with
  :py:meth:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule.draw` and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer` will no
  longer display the event table by default. This can be reenabled by setting
  the ``table`` kwarg to ``True``.

- The pass :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveResetInZeroState` was
  previously included in the preset pass manager
  :func:`~qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_0_pass_manager` which
  was used with the ``optimization_level=0`` for
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` and :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute`
  functions. However,
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveResetInZeroState` is an
  optimization pass and should not have been included in optimization level
  0 and was removed. If you need to run :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile`
  with :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.RemoveResetInZeroState` either use
  a custom pass manager or ``optimization_level`` 1, 2, or 3.

- The deprecated kwarg ``line_length`` for the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method has been removed. It
  had been deprecated since the 0.10.0 release. Instead you can use the
  ``fold`` kwarg to adjust the width of the circuit diagram.

- The ``'mpl'`` output mode for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` now requires the
  `pylatexenc <https://pylatexenc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/latexencode/>`__
  library to be installed. This was already an optional dependency for
  visualization, but was only required for the ``'latex'`` output mode
  before. It is now also required for the matplotlib drawer because it is
  needed to handle correctly sizing gates with matplotlib's
  `mathtext <https://matplotlib.org/3.2.2/tutorials/text/mathtext.html>`__
  labels for gates.

- The deprecated ``get_tokens`` methods for the :class:`qiskit.qasm.Qasm`
  and :class:`qiskit.qasm.QasmParser` has been removed. These methods have
  been deprecated since the 0.9.0 release. The
  :meth:`qiskit.qasm.Qasm.generate_tokens` and
  :meth:`qiskit.qasm.QasmParser.generate_tokens` methods should be used
  instead.

- The deprecated kwarg ``channels_to_plot`` for
  :meth:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule.draw`,
  :meth:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction.draw`,
  ``qiskit.visualization.pulse.matplotlib.ScheduleDrawer.draw`` and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer` has been removed. The kwarg
  has been deprecated since the 0.11.0 release and was replaced by
  the ``channels`` kwarg, which functions identically and should be used
  instead.

- The deprecated ``circuit_instruction_map`` attribute of the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` class has been removed.
  This attribute has been deprecated since the 0.12.0 release and was
  replaced by the ``instruction_schedule_map`` attribute which can be used
  instead.

- The ``union`` method of :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` and
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction` have been deprecated since
  the 0.12.0 release and have now been removed. Use
  :meth:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule.insert` and
  :meth:`qiskit.pulse.Instruction.meth` methods instead with the
  kwarg``time=0``.

- The deprecated ``scaling`` argument to the ``draw`` method of
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule` and :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.Instruction`
  has been replaced with ``scale`` since the 0.12.0 release and now has been
  removed. Use the ``scale`` kwarg instead.

- The deprecated ``period`` argument to :py:mod:`qiskit.pulse.library` functions
  have been replaced by ``freq`` since the 0.13.0 release and now removed. Use the
  ``freq`` kwarg instead of ``period``.

- The ``qiskit.pulse.commands`` module containing ``Commands`` classes
  was deprecated in the 0.13.0 release and has now been removed. You will
  have to upgrade your Pulse code if you were still using commands. For
  example:

  .. list-table::
    :header-rows: 2

    * - Old
      - New
    * - ``Command(args)(channel)``
      - ``Instruction(args, channel)``
    * - .. code-block:: python

          Acquire(duration)(AcquireChannel(0))
      - .. code-block:: python

          Acquire(duration, AcquireChannel(0))
    * - .. code-block:: python

          Delay(duration)(channel)
      - .. code-block:: python

          Delay(duration, channel)
    * - .. code-block:: python

          FrameChange(angle)(DriveChannel(0))
      - .. code-block:: python

          # FrameChange was also renamed
          ShiftPhase(angle, DriveChannel(0))
    * - .. code-block:: python

          Gaussian(...)(DriveChannel(0))
      - .. code-block:: python

          # Pulses need to be `Play`d
          Play(Gaussian(...), DriveChannel(0))

- All classes and function in the ``qiskit.tool.qi`` module were deprecated
  in the 0.12.0 release and have now been removed. Instead use the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module and the new methods and classes that
  it has for working with quantum states and operators.

- The ``qiskit.quantum_info.basis_state`` and
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.projector`` functions are deprecated as of
  Qiskit Terra 0.12.0 as are now removed. Use the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.QuantumState` and its derivatives
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` to work with states.

- The interactive plotting functions from :mod:`qiskit.visualization`,
  ``iplot_bloch_multivector``, ``iplot_state_city``, ``iplot_state_qsphere``,
  ``iplot_state_hinton``, ``iplot_histogram``, ``iplot_state_paulivec`` now
  are just deprecated aliases for the matplotlib based equivalents and are
  no longer interactive. The hosted static JS code that these functions
  relied on has been removed and they no longer could work. A normal
  deprecation wasn't possible because the site they depended on no longer
  exists.

- The validation components using marshmallow from :mod:`qiskit.validation`
  have been removed from terra. Since they are no longer used to build
  any objects in terra.

- The marshmallow schema classes in :mod:`qiskit.result` have been removed
  since they are no longer used by the :class:`qiskit.result.Result` class.

- The output of the :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.to_dict` method for the
  :class:`qiskit.result.Result` class is no longer in a format for direct
  JSON serialization. Depending on the content contained in instances of
  these classes there may be types that the default JSON encoder doesn't
  know how to handle, for example complex numbers or numpy arrays. If you're
  JSON serializing the output of the ``to_dict()`` method directly you should
  ensure that your JSON encoder can handle these types.

- The option to acquire multiple qubits at once was deprecated in the 0.12.0
  release and is now removed. Specifically, the init args ``mem_slots`` and
  ``reg_slots`` have been removed from
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire`, and ``channel``, ``mem_slot``
  and ``reg_slot`` will raise an error if a list is provided as input.

- Support for the use of the ``USE_RETWORKX`` environment variable which was
  introduced in the 0.13.0 release to provide an optional fallback to the
  legacy `networkx <https://networkx.github.io/>`__ based
  :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` implementation
  has been removed. This flag was only intended as provide a relief valve
  for any users that encountered a problem with the new implementation for
  one release during the transition to retworkx.

- The module within :mod:`qiskit.pulse` responsible for schedule->schedule transformations
  has been renamed from ``reschedule.py`` to ``transforms.py``. The previous import
  path has been deprecated. To upgrade your code::

      from qiskit.pulse.rescheduler import <X>

  should be replaced by::

      from qiskit.pulse.transforms import <X>

- In previous releases a :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`
  did not allow ``TransformationPass`` classes to modify the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PropertySet`.  This restriction has been lifted
  so a ``TransformationPass`` class now has read and write access to both
  the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PropertySet` and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.DAGCircuit` during
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run`. This change was made to
  more efficiently facilitate ``TransformationPass`` classes that have an
  internal state which may be necessary for later passes in the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`. Without this change a second
  redundant ``AnalysisPass`` would have been necessary to recreate the
  internal state, which could add significant overhead.

.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The name of the first positional parameter for the
  :mod:`qiskit.visualization` functions
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_hinton`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_multivector`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_city`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_paulivec`, and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere` has been renamed from
  ``rho`` to ``state``. Passing in the value by name to ``rho`` is deprecated
  and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should either pass
  the argument positionally or use the new parameter name ``state``.

- The ``qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib`` module has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. It has been renamed to
  :py:mod:`qiskit.pulse.library` which should be used instead.

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.mirror` has been deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. The method
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_ops` should be used instead,
  since mirroring could be confused with swapping the output qubits of the
  circuit. The :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.reverse_ops` method
  only reverses the order of gates that are applied instead of mirroring.

- The :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.qubits` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.clbits` methods of
  :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` have been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. They have been replaced with properties of
  the same name, :attr:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.qubits` and
  :attr:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.clbits`, and are cached so
  accessing them is much faster.

- The ``get_sample_pulse`` method for
  ``qiskit.pulse.library.ParametricPulse`` derived classes (for example
  :class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.GaussianSquare`) has been deprecated and
  will be removed in a future release. It has been replaced by the
  ``get_waveform`` method (for example
  :meth:`~qiskit.pulse.library.GaussianSquare.get_waveform`) which should
  behave identically.

- The use of the optional ``condition`` argument on
  :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode`,
  :meth:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.apply_operation_back`, and
  :meth:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.apply_operation_front` has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead the
  ``control`` set in :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction` instances being
  added to a :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` should be used.

- The ``set_atol`` and ``set_rtol`` class methods of the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.BaseOperator` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.QuantumState` classes (and
  their subclasses such as :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`
  and :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix`) are deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead the value for the attributes
  ``.atol`` and ``.rtol`` should be set on the class instead. For example::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import ScalarOp

    ScalarOp.atol = 3e-5
    op = ScalarOp(2)

- The interactive plotting functions from :mod:`qiskit.visualization`,
  ``iplot_bloch_multivector``, ``iplot_state_city``, ``iplot_state_qsphere``,
  ``iplot_state_hinton``, ``iplot_histogram``, ``iplot_state_paulivec`` have
  been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. The matplotlib
  based equivalent functions from :mod:`qiskit.visualization`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_bloch_multivector`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_city`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_hinton`,
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_histogram`, and
  :func:`~qiskit.visualization.plot_state_paulivec` should be used instead.

- The properties ``acquires``, ``mem_slots``, and ``reg_slots`` of the
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire` pulse instruction have been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. They are just
  duplicates of :attr:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.channel`,
  :attr:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.mem_slot`,
  and :attr:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire.reg_slot` respectively
  now that previously deprecated support for using multiple qubits in a
  single :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire` instruction has been
  removed.

- The ``SamplePulse`` class from :mod:`qiskit.pulse` has been renamed to
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.library.Waveform`. ``SamplePulse`` is deprecated
  and will be removed in a future release.

- The style dictionary key ``cregbundle`` has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. This has been replaced by the
  kwarg ``cregbundle`` added to the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw`.


.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_nonlocal_gates` previously
  included multi-qubit :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction` objects
  (for example, :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.Barrier`) in its count of
  non-local gates. This has been corrected so that only non-local
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` objects are counted.
  Fixes `#4500 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4500>`__

- :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` instances with a set
  ``ctrl_state`` were in some cases not being evaluated as equal, even if the
  compared gates were equivalent. This has been resolved so that
  Fixes `#4573 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4573>`__

- When accessing a bit from a
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` or
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister` by index when using numpy
  `integer types` <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/basics.types.html>`__
  would previously raise a ``CircuitError`` exception. This has been
  resolved so numpy types can be used in addition to Python's built-in
  ``int`` type.
  Fixes `#3929 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3929>`__.

- A bug was fixed where only the first :class:`qiskit.pulse.configuration.Kernel`
  or :class:`qiskit.pulse.configuration.Discriminator` for an
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Acquire` was used when there were multiple Acquires
  at the same time in a :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule`.

- The SI unit use for constructing :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.SetFrequency`
  objects is in Hz, but when a :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjInstruction`
  object is created from a :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.SetFrequency` instance
  it needs to be converted to GHz. This conversion was missing from previous
  releases and has been fixed.

- Previously it was possible to set the number of control qubits to zero in
  which case the the original, potentially non-controlled, operation would be
  returned. This could cause an ``AttributeError`` to be raised if the caller
  attempted to access an attribute which only
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` object have. This has been fixed
  by adding a getter and setter for
  :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate.num_ctrl_qubits` to validate
  that a valid value is being used.
  Fixes `#4576 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4576>`__

- Open controls were implemented by modifying a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate`
  objects :attr:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate.definition`. However, when the gate
  already exists in the basis set, this definition was not used, which
  resulted in incorrect circuits being sent to a backend after transpilation.
  This has been fixed by modifying the :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.Unroller`
  pass to use the definition if it encounters a controlled gate with open
  controls.
  Fixes `#4437 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4437>`__

- The ``insert_barriers`` keyword argument in the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZZFeatureMap` class didn't actually insert
  barriers in between the Hadamard layers and evolution layers. This has been
  fixed so that barriers are now properly inserted.

- Fixed issue where some gates with three or more qubits would fail to compile
  in certain instances. Refer to
  `#4577 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4577` for more detail.

- The matplotlib (``'mpl'``) output backend for the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` and the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function was not properly
  scaling when the kwarg ``scale`` was set. Fonts and line widths
  did not scale with the rest of the image. This has been fixed and all
  elements of the circuit diagram now scale properly. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.h(0)
      circuit.cx(0, 1)
      circuit.draw(output='mpl', scale=0.5)

  Fixes `#4179 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4179>`_.

- Fixes issue where initializing or evolving
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes by circuits by
  circuit containing :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Barrier` instructions would
  raise an exception. Fixes
  `#4461 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4461>`__

- Previously when a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` contained a
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Gate` with a classical condition the transpiler
  would sometimes fail when using ``optimization_level=3`` on
  :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` or
  :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute` raising an ``UnboundLocalError``. This has
  been fixed by updating the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.ConsolidateBlocks` pass to account for
  the classical condition.
  Fixes `#4672 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4672>`_.

- In some situations long gate and register names would overflow, or leave
  excessive empty space around them when using the ``'mpl'`` output backend
  for the :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function. This has been fixed
  by using correct text widths for a proportional font. Fixes
  `#4611 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4611>`__,
  `#4605 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4605>`__,
  `#4545 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4545>`__,
  `#4497 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4497>`__,
  `#4449 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4449>`__, and
  `#3641 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3641>`__.

- When using the ``style` kwarg on the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` or
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` with the ``'mpl'`` output
  backend the dictionary key ``'showindex'`` set to ``True``, the index
  numbers at the top of the column did not line up properly. This has been
  fixed.

- When using ``cregbunde=True`` with the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and measuring onto
  a second fold, the measure arrow would overwrite the creg count. The count
  was moved to the left to prevent this. Fixes
  `#4148 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4148>`__.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CSwapGate` gates and a controlled
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RZZGate` gates now display with their
  appropriate symbols instead of in a box.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function controlled gates
  created using the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.to_gate` method
  were not properly spaced and could overlap with other gates in the circuit
  diagram. This issue has been fixed.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  gates with arrays as parameters, such as
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.HamiltonianGate`, no longer display with
  excessive space around them. Fixes
  `#4352 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4352>`__.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  generic gates created by directly instantiating :class:`qiskit.circuit.Gate`
  method now display the proper background color for the gate. Fixes
  `#4496 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4496>`__.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  an ``AttributeError`` that occurred when using
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Isometry` or :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Initialize`
  has been fixed. Fixes
  `#4439 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4439>`__.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  some open-controlled gates did not properly display the open controls.
  This has been corrected so that open controls are properly displayed
  as open circles. Fixes
  `#4248 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4248>`__.

- When using the ``'mpl'`` output backend for the
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function
  setting the ``fold`` kwarg to -1 will now properly display the circuit
  without folding. Fixes
  `#4506 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4506>`__.

- Parametric pulses from :mod:`qiskit.pulse.library.discrete`
  now have zero ends of parametric pulses by default. The endpoints are
  defined such that for a function :math:`f(x)` then
  :math:`f(-1) = f(duration + 1) = 0`.
  Fixes `#4317 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4317>`__


.. _Release Notes_0.15.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The :class:`qiskit.result.Result` class which was previously constructed
  using the marshmallow library has been refactored to not depend on
  marshmallow anymore. This new implementation should be a seamless transition
  but some specific behavior that was previously inherited from marshmallow
  may not work. Please file issues for any incompatibilities found.

Aer 0.6.1
=========

.. _Release Notes_0.6.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

This 0.6.0 release includes numerous performance improvements for all
simulators in the Aer provider and significant changes to the build system
when building from source. The main changes are support for SIMD
vectorization, approximation in the matrix product state method via
bond-dimension truncation, more efficient Pauli expectation value
computation, and greatly improved efficiency in Python conversion of
C++ result objects. The build system was upgraded to use the
`Conan <https://conan.io/>`__ to manage common C++ dependencies when
building from source.

.. _Release Notes_0.6.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Add density matrix snapshot support to "statevector" and "statevector_gpu"
  methods of the QasmSimulator.

- Allow density matrix snapshots on specific qubits, not just all qubits.
  This computes the partial trace of the state over the remaining qubits.

- Adds Pauli expectation value snapshot support to the `"density_matrix"`
  simulation method of the :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.
  Add snapshots to circuits using the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotExpectationValue`
  extension.

- Greatly improves performance of the Pauli expectation value snapshot
  algorithm for the `"statevector"`, `"statevector_gpu`, `"density_matrix"`,
  and `"density_matrix_gpu"` simulation methods of the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`.

- Enable the gate-fusion circuit optimization from the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` in both the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.UnitarySimulator` backends.

- Improve the performance of average snapshot data in simulator results.
  This effects probability, Pauli expectation value, and density matrix snapshots
  using the following extensions:

  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotExpectationValue`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotProbabilities`
  * :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotDensityMatrix`

- Add move constructor and improve memory usage of the C++ matrix class
  to minimize copies of matrices when moving output of simulators into results.

- Improve performance of unitary simulator.

- Add approximation to the `"matrix_product_state"` simulation method of the
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` to limit the bond-dimension of
  the MPS.

  There are two modes of approximation. Both discard the smallest
  Schmidt coefficients following the SVD algorithm.
  There are two parameters that control the degree of approximation:
  ``"matrix_product_state_max_bond_dimension"`` (int): Sets a limit
  on the number of Schmidt coefficients retained at the end of
  the svd algorithm. Coefficients beyond this limit will be discarded.
  (Default: None, i.e., no limit on the bond dimension).
  ``"matrix_product_state_truncation_threshold"`` (double):
  Discard the smallest coefficients for which the sum of
  their squares is smaller than this threshold.
  (Default: 1e-16).

- Improve the performance of measure sampling when using the
  `"matrix_product_state"` :class:`~qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator`
  simulation method.

- Add support for ``Delay``, ``Phase`` and ``SetPhase`` pulse instructions
  to the :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator`.

- Improve the performance of the :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator`
  by caching calls to RHS function

- Introduce alternate DE solving methods, specifiable through ``backend_options``
  in the :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator`.

- Improve performance of simulator result classes by using move semantics
  and removing unnecessary copies that were happening when combining results
  from separate experiments into the final result object.

- Greatly improve performance of pybind11 conversion of simulator results by
  using move semantics where possible, and by moving vector and matrix results
  to Numpy arrays without copies.

- Change the RNG engine for simulators from 32-bit Mersenne twister to
  64-bit Mersenne twister engine.

- Improves the performance of the `"statevector"` simulation method of the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimulator` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.StatevectorSimulator` by using SIMD
  intrinsics on systems that support the AVX2 instruction set. AVX2
  support is automatically detected and enabled at runtime.


.. _Release Notes_0.6.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Changes the build system to use the
  `Conan package manager <https://conan.io/>`__.
  This tool will handle most of the dependencies needed by the C++ source
  code. Internet connection may be needed for the first build or when
  dependencies are added or updated, in order to download the required
  packages if they are not in your Conan local repository.

  When building the standalone version of qiskit-aer you must install conan
  first with:

  .. code-block:: bash

    pip install conan

- Changes how transpilation passes are handled in the C++ Controller classes
  so that each pass must be explicitly called. This allows for greater
  customization on when each pass should be called, and with what parameters.
  In particular this enables setting different parameters for the gate
  fusion optimization pass depending on the QasmController simulation method.

- Add ``gate_length_units`` kwarg to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.from_device`
  for specifying custom ``gate_lengths`` in the device noise model function
  to handle unit conversions for internal code.

- Add Controlled-Y ("cy") gate to the Stabilizer simulator methods supported
  gateset.

- For Aer's backend the jsonschema validation of input qobj objects from
  terra is now opt-in instead of being enabled by default. If you want
  to enable jsonschema validation of qobj set the ``validate`` kwarg on
  the :meth:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimualtor.run` method for the backend
  object to ``True``.

- Adds an OpSet object to the base simulator State class to allow easier
  validation of instructions, gates, and snapshots supported by simulators.

- Refactor OpSet class. Moved OpSet to separate header file and add
  ``contains`` and ``difference`` methods based on ``std::set::contains``
  and ``std::algorithm::set_difference``. These replace the removed invalid
  and validate instructions from OpSet, but with the order reversed. It
  returns a list of other ops not in current opset rather than opset
  instructions not in the other.

- Improves how measurement sampling optimization is checked. The expensive
  part of this operation is now done once during circuit construction where
  rather than multiple times during simulation for when checking memory
  requirements, simulation method, and final execution.


.. _Release Notes_0.6.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Remove "extended_stabilizer" from the automatically selected simulation
  methods. This is needed as the extended stabilizer method is not exact
  and may give incorrect results for certain circuits unless the user
  knows how to optimize its configuration parameters.

  The automatic method now only selects from "stabilizer", "density_matrix",
  and "statevector" methods. If a non-Clifford circuit that is too large for
  the statevector method is executed an exception will be raised suggesting
  you could try explicitly using the "extended_stabilizer" or
  "matrix_product_state" methods instead.

- Disables gate fusion for the matrix product state simulation method as this
  was causing issues with incorrect results being returned in some cases.

- Fixes a bug causing incorrect channel evaluation in the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.PulseSimulator`.

- Fixes several minor bugs for Hamiltonian parsing edge cases in the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.pulse.system_models.hamiltonian_model.HamiltonianModel`
  class.

Ignis 0.4.0
===========

.. _Release Notes_0.4.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The main change made in this release is a refactor of the Randomized
Benchmarking code to integrate the updated Clifford class
:class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` from Terra and to improve the
CNOT-Dihedral class.


.. _Release Notes_0.4.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function was refactored to use the updated Clifford class :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford`,
  to allow efficient Randomized Benchmarking (RB) on Clifford sequences with more than 2 qubits.
  In addition, the code of the CNOT-Dihedral class
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CNOTDihedral`
  was refactored to make it more efficient, by using numpy arrays, as well not using pre-generated
  pickle files storing all the 2-qubit group elements.
  The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function has a new kwarg ``rand_seed`` which can be used to specify a seed for the random number
  generator used to generate the RB circuits. This can be useful for having a reproducible circuit.

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.qv_circuits` function has a new
  kwarg ``seed`` which can be used to specify a seed for the random number
  generator used to generate the Quantum Volume circuits. This can be useful
  for having a reproducible circuit.


.. _Release Notes_0.4.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function is now using the updated Clifford class :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford`
  and the updated CNOT-Dihedral class
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CNOTDihedral` to construct its
  output instead of using pre-generated group tables for the Clifford and CNOT-Dihedral
  group elements, which were stored in pickle files.
  This may result in subtle differences from the output from the previous version.

- A new requirement `scikit-learn <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/>`__ has
  been added to the requirements list. This dependency was added in the 0.3.0
  release but wasn't properly exposed as a dependency in that release. This
  would lead to an ``ImportError`` if the
  :mod:`qiskit.ignis.measurement.discriminator.iq_discriminators` module was
  imported. This is now correctly listed as a dependency so that
  ``scikit-learn`` will be installed with qiskit-ignis.

- The :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.qv_circuits` function is now using
  the circuit library class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume`
  to construct its output instead of building the circuit from scratch.
  This may result in subtle differences from the output from the previous
  version.

- Tomography fitters can now also get list of `Result` objects instead of a single `Result`
  as requested in `issue #320 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis/issues/320/>`_.


.. _Release Notes_0.4.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The kwarg ``interleaved_gates`` for the
  :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.randomized_benchmarking_seq`
  function has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  It is superseded by ``interleaved_elem``.
  The helper functions :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.BasicUtils`,
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.CliffordUtils` and
  :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.DihedralUtils` were deprecated.
  These classes are superseded by :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.RBgroup`
  that handles the group operations needed for RB.
  The class :class:`qiskit.ignis.verification.randomized_benchmarking.Clifford`
  is superseded by :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford`.

- The kwargs ``qr`` and ``cr`` for the
  :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.qv_circuits` function have been deprecated
  and will be removed in a future release. These kwargs were documented as
  being used for specifying a :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumRegister` and
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.ClassicalRegister` to use in the generated Quantum
  Volume circuits instead of creating new ones. However, the parameters were
  never actually respected and a new Register would always be created
  regardless of whether they were set or not. This behavior is unchanged and
  these kwargs still do not have any effect, but are being deprecated prior
  to removal to avoid a breaking change for users who may have been setting
  either.

- Support for passing in subsets of qubits as a list in the ``qubit_lists``
  parameter for the :func:`qiskit.ignis.verification.qv_circuits` function
  has been deprecated and will removed in a future release. In the past
  this was used to specify a layout to run the circuit on a device. In
  other words if you had a 5 qubit device and wanted to run a 2 qubit
  QV circuit on qubits 1, 3, and 4 of that device. You would pass in
  ``[1, 3, 4]`` as one of the lists in ``qubit_lists``, which would
  generate a 5 qubit virtual circuit and have qv applied to qubits 1, 3,
  and 4 in that virtual circuit. However, this functionality is not necessary
  and overlaps with the concept of ``initial_layout`` in the transpiler and
  whether a circuit has been embedded with a layout set. Moving forward
  instead you should just run :func:`~qiskit.compiler.transpile` or
  :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute` with initial layout set to do this. For
  example, running the above example would become::

    from qiskit import execute
    from qiskit.ignis.verification import qv_circuits

    initial_layout = [1, 3, 4]
    qv_circs, _ = qv_circuits([list(range3)])
    execute(qv_circuits, initial_layout=initial_layout)


.. _Release Notes_0.4.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix a bug of the position of measurement pulses inserted by
  py:func:`qiskit.ignis.characterization.calibrations.pulse_schedules.drag_schedules`.
  Fixes `#465 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis/issues/465>`__

Aqua 0.7.5
==========

.. _Release Notes_0.7.5_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Removed soft dependency on CPLEX in ADMMOptimizer. Now default optimizers used by ADMMOptimizer
  are MinimumEigenOptimizer for QUBO problems and SlsqpOptimizer as a continuous optimizer. You
  can still use CplexOptimizer as an optimizer for ADMMOptimizer, but it should be set explicitly.

- New Yahoo! finance provider created.

- Introduced ``QuadraticProgramConverter`` which is an abstract class for converters.
  Added ``convert``/``interpret`` methods for converters instead of ``encode``/``decode``.
  Added ``to_ising`` and ``from_ising`` to ``QuadraticProgram`` class.
  Moved all parameters from ``convert`` to constructor except ``name``.
  Created setter/getter for converter parameters.
  Added ``auto_define_penalty`` and ``interpret`` for``LinearEqualityToPenalty``.
  Now error messages of converters are more informative.

- Added an SLSQP optimizer ``qiskit.optimization.algorithms.SlsqpOptimizer`` as a wrapper
  of the corresponding SciPy optimization method. This is a classical optimizer, does not depend
  on quantum algorithms and may be used as a replacement for ``CobylaOptimizer``.

- Cobyla optimizer has been modified to accommodate a multi start feature introduced
  in the SLSQP optimizer. By default, the optimizer does not run in the multi start mode.

- The ``SummedOp`` does a mathematically more correct check for equality, where
  expressions such as ``X + X == 2*X`` and ``X + Z == Z + X`` evaluate to ``True``.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.5_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- GSLS optimizer class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_iter`` in favor of ``maxiter``.
  SPSA optimizer class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_trials`` in favor of ``maxiter``.
  optimize_svm function deprecated ``max_iters`` parameter in favor of ``maxiter``.
  ADMMParameters class deprecated ``__init__`` parameter ``max_iter`` in favor of ``maxiter``.

- The ising convert classes
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.converters.QuadraticProgramToIsing` and
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.converters.IsingToQuadraticProgram` have
  been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead the
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram.to_ising` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticPrgraom.from_ising` should be used
  instead.

- The ``pprint_as_string`` method for
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram` has been deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead you should just run
  ``.pprint_as_string()`` on the output from
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram.to_docplex`

- The ``prettyprint`` method for
  :class:`qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram` has been deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead you should just run
  ``.prettyprint()`` on the output from
  :meth:`~qiskit.optimization.QuadraticProgram.to_docplex`

.. _Release Notes_0.7.5_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Changed in python version 3.8: On macOS, the spawn start method is now the
  default. The fork start method should be considered unsafe as it can
  lead to crashes in subprocesses.
  However P_BFGS doesn't support spawn, so we revert to single process.
  Refer to
  `#1109 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1109>` for more details.

- Binding parameters in the ``CircuitStateFn`` did not copy
  the value of ``is_measurement`` and always set ``is_measurement=False``.
  This has been fixed.

- Previously, SummedOp.to_matrix_op built a list MatrixOp's (with numpy
  matrices) and then summed them, returning a single MatrixOp. Some
  algorithms (for example vqe) require summing thousands of matrices, which
  exhausts memory when building the list of matrices. With this change,
  no list is constructed. Rather, each operand in the sum is converted to
  a matrix, added to an accumulator, and discarded.

- Changing backends in VQE from statevector to qasm_simulator or real device
  was causing an error due to CircuitSampler incompatible reuse. VQE was changed
  to always create a new CircuitSampler and create a new  expectation in case not
  entered by user.
  Refer to
  `#1153 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1153>` for more details.

- Exchange and Wikipedia finance providers were fixed to correctly handle Quandl data.
  Refer to
  `#775 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/775>` for more details.
  Fixes a divide by 0 error on finance providers mean vector and covariance matrix
  calculations. Refer to
  `#781 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/781>` for more details.

- The ``ListOp.combo_fn`` property has been lost in several transformations,
  such as converting to another operator type, traversing, reducing or
  multiplication. Now this attribute is propagated to the resulting operator.

- The evaluation of some operator expressions, such as of ``SummedOp``s
  and evaluations with the ``CircuitSampler`` did not treat coefficients
  correctly or ignored them completely. E.g. evaluating
  ``~StateFn(0 * (I + Z)) @ Plus`` did not yield 0 or the normalization
  of ``~StateFn(I) @ ((Plus + Minus) / sqrt(2))`` missed a factor
  of ``sqrt(2)``. This has been fixed.

- ``OptimizationResult`` included some public setters and class variables
  were ``Optional``. This fix makes all class variables read-only so that
  mypy and pylint can check types more effectively.
  ``MinimumEigenOptimizer.solve`` generated bitstrings in a result as ``str``.
  This fix changed the result into ``List[float]`` as the other algorithms do.
  Some public classes related to optimization algorithms were missing in
  the documentation of ``qiskit.optimization.algorithms``. This fix added
  all such classes to the docstring.
  `#1131 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1131>` for more details.

- ``OptimizationResult.__init__`` did not check whether the sizes of ``x`` and
  ``variables`` match or not (they should match). This fix added the check to
  raise an error if they do not match and fixes bugs detected by the check.
  This fix also adds missing unit tests related to ``OptimizationResult.variable_names``
  and ``OptimizationResult.variables_dict`` in ``test_converters``.
  `#1167 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1167>` for more details.

- Fix parameter binding in the ``OperatorStateFn``, which did not bind
  parameters of the underlying primitive but just the coefficients.

- ``op.eval(other)``, where ``op`` is of type ``OperatorBase``, sometimes
  silently returns a nonsensical value when the number of qubits in ``op``
  and ``other`` are not equal. This fix results in correct behavior, which
  is to throw an error rather than return a value, because the input in
  this case is invalid.

- The ``construct_circuit`` method of ``VQE`` previously returned the
  expectation value to be evaluated as type ``OperatorBase``.
  This functionality has been moved into ``construct_expectation`` and
  ``construct_circuit`` returns a list of the circuits that are evaluated
  to compute the expectation value.


IBM Q Provider 0.8.0
====================

.. _Release Notes_0.8.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend` now has a new
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.reservations` method that
  returns reservation information for the backend, with optional filtering.
  In addition, you can now use
  :meth:`provider.backends.my_reservations()<qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackendService.my_reservations>`
  to query for your own reservations.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.result` raises an
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJobFailureError` exception if
  the job has failed. The exception message now contains the reason
  the job failed, if the entire job failed for a single reason.

- A new attribute ``client_version`` was added to
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` and
  :class:`qiskit.result.Result` object retrieved via
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.result`.
  ``client_version`` is a dictionary with the key being the name
  and the value being the version of the client used to submit
  the job, such as Qiskit.

- The :func:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.least_busy` function now takes a new,
  optional parameter ``reservation_lookahead``. If specified or defaulted to,
  a backend is considered unavailable if it has reservations in the next
  ``n`` minutes, where ``n`` is the value of ``reservation_lookahead``.
  For example, if the default value of 60 is used, then any
  backends that have reservations in the next 60 minutes are considered unavailable.

- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.ManagedResults` now has a new
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.ManagedResults.combine_results` method
  that combines results from all managed jobs and returns a single
  :class:`~qiskit.result.Result` object. This ``Result`` object can
  be used, for example, in ``qiskit-ignis`` fitter methods.


.. _Release Notes_0.8.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Timestamps in the following fields are now in local time instead of UTC:

  * Backend properties returned by
    :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.properties`.
  * Backend properties returned by
    :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.properties`.
  * ``estimated_start_time`` and ``estimated_complete_time`` in
    :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.QueueInfo`, returned by
    :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.queue_info`.
  * ``date`` in :class:`~qiskit.result.Result`, returned by
    :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.result`.

  In addition, the ``datetime`` parameter for
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.properties` is also expected to be
  in local time unless it has UTC timezone information.

- ``websockets`` 8.0 or above is now required if Python 3.7 or above is used.
  ``websockets`` 7.0 will continue to be used for Python 3.6 or below.

- On Windows, the event loop policy is set to ``WindowsSelectorEventLoopPolicy``
  instead of using the default ``WindowsProactorEventLoopPolicy``. This fixes
  the issue that the :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.result` method
  could hang on Windows. Fixes
  `#691 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/691>`_


.. _Release Notes_0.8.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Use of ``Qconfig.py`` to save IBM Quantum Experience credentials is deprecated
  and will be removed in the next release. You should use ``qiskitrc``
  (the default) instead.


.. _Release Notes_0.8.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes an issue wherein a call to :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.jobs`
  can hang if the number of jobs being returned is large. Fixes
  `#674 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/674>`_

- Fixes an issue which would raise a ``ValueError`` when building
  error maps in Jupyter for backends that are offline. Fixes
  `#706 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/706>`_

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.jobs` will now return the correct
  list of :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` objects when the
  ``status`` kwarg is set to ``'RUNNING'``.

- The package metadata has been updated to properly reflect the dependency
  on ``qiskit-terra`` >= 0.14.0. This dependency was implicitly added as
  part of the 0.7.0 release but was not reflected in the package requirements
  so it was previously possible to install ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` with a
  version of ``qiskit-terra`` which was too old. Fixes
  `#677 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/677>`_

*************
Qiskit 0.19.6
*************

Terra 0.14.2
============

No Change

Aer 0.5.2
=========

No Change

Ignis 0.3.3
===========

.. _Release Notes_0.3.3_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- A new requirement `scikit-learn <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/>`__ has
  been added to the requirements list. This dependency was added in the 0.3.0
  release but wasn't properly exposed as a dependency in that release. This
  would lead to an ``ImportError`` if the
  :mod:`qiskit.ignis.measurement.discriminator.iq_discriminators` module was
  imported. This is now correctly listed as a dependency so that
  ``scikit-learn`` will be installed with qiskit-ignis.


.. _Release Notes_0.3.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixes an issue in qiskit-ignis 0.3.2 which would raise an ``ImportError``
  when :mod:`qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.fitters.process_fitter` was
  imported without ``cvxpy`` being installed.

Aqua 0.7.3
==========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.7.2
====================

No Change


*************
Qiskit 0.19.5
*************

Terra 0.14.2
============

No Change

Aer 0.5.2
=========

No Change

Ignis 0.3.2
===========

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.TomographyFitter.fit` method has improved
  detection logic for the default fitter. Previously, the ``cvx`` fitter method
  was used whenever `cvxpy <https://www.cvxpy.org/>`__ was installed. However,
  it was possible to install cvxpy without an SDP solver that would work for the
  ``cvx`` fitter method. This logic has been reworked so that the ``cvx``
  fitter method is only used if ``cvxpy`` is installed and an SDP solver is present
  that can be used. Otherwise, the ``lstsq`` fitter is used.

- Fixes an edge case in
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.mitigation.measurement.fitters.MeasurementFitter.apply`
  for input that has invalid or incorrect state labels that don't match
  the calibration circuit. Previously, this would not error and just return
  an empty result. Instead now this case is correctly caught and a
  ``QiskitError`` exception is raised when using incorrect labels.

Aqua 0.7.3
==========

.. _Release Notes_0.7.3_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The `cvxpy <https://www.cvxpy.org/>`__ dependency which is required for
  the svm classifier has been removed from the requirements list and made
  an optional dependency. This is because installing cvxpy is not seamless
  in every environment and often requires a compiler be installed to run.
  To use the svm classifier now you'll need to install cvxpy by either
  running ``pip install cvxpy<1.1.0`` or to install it with aqua running
  ``pip install qiskit-aqua[cvx]``.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.3_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The ``compose`` method of the ``CircuitOp`` used ``QuantumCircuit.combine`` which has been
  changed to use ``QuantumCircuit.compose``. Using combine leads to the problem that composing
  an operator with a ``CircuitOp`` based on a named register does not chain the operators but
  stacks them. E.g. composing ``Z ^ 2`` with a circuit based on a 2-qubit named register yielded
  a 4-qubit operator instead of a 2-qubit operator.

- The ``MatrixOp.to_instruction`` method previously returned an operator and not
  an instruction. This method has been updated to return an Instruction.
  Note that this only works if the operator primitive is unitary, otherwise
  an error is raised upon the construction of the instruction.

- The ``__hash__`` method of the ``PauliOp`` class used the ``id()`` method
  which prevents set comparisons to work as expected since they rely on hash
  tables and identical objects used to not have identical hashes. Now, the
  implementation uses a hash of the string representation inline with the
  implementation in the ``Pauli`` class.

IBM Q Provider 0.7.2
====================

No Change


*************
Qiskit 0.19.4
*************

Terra 0.14.2
============

.. _Release Notes_0.14.2_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The ``circuit_to_gate`` and ``circuit_to_instruction`` converters had
  previously automatically included the generated gate or instruction in the
  active ``SessionEquivalenceLibrary``. These converters now accept an
  optional ``equivalence_library`` keyword argument to specify if and where
  the converted instances should be registered. The default behavior is not
  to register the converted instance.


.. _Release Notes_0.14.2_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Implementations of the multi-controlled X Gate (``MCXGrayCode``,
  ``MCXRecursive`` and ``MCXVChain``) have had their ``name``
  properties changed to more accurately describe their
  implementation (``mcx_gray``, ``mcx_recursive``, and
  ``mcx_vchain`` respectively.) Previously, these gates shared the
  name ``mcx` with ``MCXGate``, which caused these gates to be
  incorrectly transpiled and simulated.

- ``ControlledGate`` instances with a set ``ctrl_state`` were in some cases
  not being evaluated as equal, even if the compared gates were equivalent.
  This has been resolved.

- Fixed the SI unit conversion for :py:class:`qiskit.pulse.SetFrequency`. The
  ``SetFrequency`` instruction should be in Hz on the frontend and has to be
  converted to GHz when ``SetFrequency`` is converted to ``PulseQobjInstruction``.

- Open controls were implemented by modifying a gate\'s
  definition. However, when the gate already exists in the basis,
  this definition is not used, which yields incorrect circuits sent
  to a backend. This modifies the unroller to output the definition
  if it encounters a controlled gate with open controls.

Aer 0.5.2
=========

No Change

Ignis 0.3.0
===========

No Change

Aqua 0.7.2
==========

Prelude
-------
VQE expectation computation with Aer qasm_simulator now defaults to a
computation that has the expected shot noise behavior.

Upgrade Notes
-------------
- `cvxpy <https://github.com/cvxgrp/cvxpy/>`_ is now in the requirements list
  as a dependency for qiskit-aqua. It is used for the quadratic program solver
  which is used as part of the :class:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms.QSVM`. Previously
  ``cvxopt`` was an optional dependency that needed to be installed to use
  this functionality. This is no longer required as cvxpy will be installed
  with qiskit-aqua.
- For state tomography run as part of :class:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms.HHL` with
  a QASM backend the tomography fitter function
  :meth:`qiskit.ignis.verification.StateTomographyFitter.fit` now gets called
  explicitly with the method set to ``lstsq`` to always use the least-squares
  fitting. Previously it would opportunistically try to use the ``cvx`` fitter
  if ``cvxpy`` were installed. But, the ``cvx`` fitter depends on a
  specifically configured ``cvxpy`` installation with an SDP solver installed
  as part of ``cvxpy`` which is not always present in an environment with
  ``cvxpy`` installed.
- The VQE expectation computation using qiskit-aer's
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotExpectationValue` instruction
  is not enabled by default anymore. This was changed to be the default in
  0.7.0 because it is significantly faster, but it led to unexpected ideal
  results without shot noise (see
  `#1013 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/issues/1013>`_ for more
  details). The default has now changed back to match user expectations. Using
  the faster expectation computation is now opt-in by setting the new
  ``include_custom`` kwarg to ``True`` on the
  :class:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms.VQE` constructor.

New Features
------------
- A new kwarg ``include_custom`` has been added to the constructor for
  :class:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms.VQE` and it's subclasses (mainly
  :class:`qiskit.aqua.algorithms.QAOA`). When set to true and the
  ``expectation`` kwarg is set to ``None`` (the default) this will enable
  the use of VQE expectation computation with Aer's ``qasm_simulator``
  :class:`qiskit.providers.aer.extensions.SnapshotExpectationValue` instruction.
  The special Aer snapshot based computation is much faster but with the ideal
  output similar to state vector simulator.

IBM Q Provider 0.7.2
====================

No Change

*************
Qiskit 0.19.3
*************

Terra 0.14.1
============

No Change

Aer 0.5.2
=========

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed bug with statevector and unitary simulators running a number of (parallel)
  shots equal to the number of CPU threads instead of only running a single shot.

- Fixes the "diagonal" qobj gate instructions being applied incorrectly
  in the density matrix Qasm Simulator method.

- Fixes bug where conditional gates were not being applied correctly
  on the density matrix simulation method.

- Fix bug in CZ gate and Z gate for "density_matrix_gpu" and
  "density_matrix_thrust" QasmSimulator methods.

- Fixes issue where memory requirements of simulation were not being checked
  on the QasmSimulator when using a non-automatic simulation method.

- Fixed a memory leak that effected the GPU simulator methods

Ignis 0.3.0
===========

No Change

Aqua 0.7.1
==========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.7.2
====================

Bug Fixes
---------

- :meth:`qiskit.provider.ibmq.IBMQBackend.jobs` will now return the correct
  list of :class:`~qiskit.provider.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` objects when the
  ``status`` kwarg is set to ``'RUNNING'``. Fixes
  `#523 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/523>`_

- The package metadata has been updated to properly reflect the dependency
  on ``qiskit-terra`` >= 0.14.0. This dependency was implicitly added as
  part of the 0.7.0 release but was not reflected in the package requirements
  so it was previously possible to install ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` with a
  version of ``qiskit-terra`` which was too old. Fixes
  `#677 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider/issues/677>`_

*************
Qiskit 0.19.0
*************

Terra 0.14.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.14.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The biggest
change for this release is the introduction of a quantum circuit library
in :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`, containing some circuit families of
interest.

The circuit library gives users access to a rich set of well-studied
circuit families, instances of which can be used as benchmarks,
as building blocks in building more complex circuits, or
as a tool to explore quantum computational advantage over classical.
The contents of this library will continue to grow and mature.

The initial release of the circuit library contains:

* ``standard_gates``: these are fixed-width gates commonly used as primitive
  building blocks, consisting of 1, 2, and 3 qubit gates. For example
  the :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XGate`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.RZZGate` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.CSWAPGate`. The old location of these
  gates under ``qiskit.extensions.standard`` is deprecated.
* ``generalized_gates``: these are families that can generalize to arbitrarily
  many qubits, for example a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.Permutation` or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GMS` (Global Molmer-Sorensen gate).
* ``boolean_logic``: circuits that transform basis states according to simple
  Boolean logic functions, such as :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ADD` or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.XOR`.
* ``arithmetic``: a set of circuits for doing classical arithmetic such as
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.WeightedAdder` and
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.IntegerComparator`.
* ``basis_changes``: circuits such as the quantum Fourier transform,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QFT`, that mathematically apply basis
  changes.
* ``n_local``: patterns to easily create large circuits with rotation and
  entanglement layers, such as  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.TwoLocal`
  which uses single-qubit rotations and two-qubit entanglements.
* ``data_preparation``: circuits that take classical input data and encode it
  in a quantum state that is difficult to simulate, e.g.
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.PauliFeatureMap` or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.ZZFeatureMap`.
* Other circuits that have proven interesting in the literature, such as
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.QuantumVolume`,
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.GraphState`, or
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.IQP`.

To allow easier use of these circuits as building blocks, we have introduced
a :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` method of
:class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` for composition of circuits either
with other circuits (by welding them at the ends and optionally permuting
wires) or with other simpler gates::

  >>> lhs.compose(rhs, qubits=[3, 2], inplace=True)

.. parsed-literal::
                                                     
      lqr_1_0:  H     rqr_0:  Tdg     lqr_1_0:  H 
                                                
      lqr_1_1:  X     rqr_1:  X     lqr_1_1:  X 
                                              
      lqr_1_2:  U1(0.1)   +                     =  lqr_1_2:  U1(0.1)  X 
                                                   
      lqr_2_0:                            lqr_2_0:  Tdg 
                                                                    
      lqr_2_1:  X                            lqr_2_1:  X 
                                                            
      lcr_0: 0                            lcr_0: 0 
      lcr_1: 0                            lcr_1: 0 

With this, Qiskit's circuits no longer assume an implicit
initial state of :math:`|0\rangle`, and will not be drawn with this
initial state. The all-zero initial state is still assumed on a backend
when a circuit is executed.


.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary.has_entry`, has been
  added to the :class:`qiskit.circuit.EquivalenceLibrary` class to quickly
  check if a given gate has any known decompositions in the library.

- A new class :class:`~qiskit.circuit.library.IQP`, to construct an
  instantaneous quantum polynomial circuit, has been added to the circuit
  library module :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`.

- A new :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.compose` method has been added
  to :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`. It allows
  composition of two quantum circuits without having to turn one into
  a gate or instruction. It also allows permutations of qubits/clbits
  at the point of composition, as well as optional inplace modification.
  It can also be used in place of
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.append()`, as it allows
  composing instructions and operators onto the circuit as well.

- :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.Diagonal` circuits have been added to the
  circuit library. These circuits implement diagonal quantum operators
  (consisting of non-zero elements only on the diagonal). They are more
  efficiently simulated by the Aer simulator than dense matrices.

- Add :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford.from_label` method to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` class for initializing as the
  tensor product of single-qubit I, X, Y, Z, H, or S gates.

- Schedule transformer :func:`qiskit.pulse.reschedule.compress_pulses`
  performs an optimization pass to reduce the usage of waveform
  memory in hardware by replacing multiple identical instances of
  a pulse in a pulse schedule with a single pulse.
  For example::

      from qiskit.pulse import reschedule

      schedules = []
      for _ in range(2):
          schedule = Schedule()
          drive_channel = DriveChannel(0)
          schedule += Play(SamplePulse([0.0, 0.1]), drive_channel)
          schedule += Play(SamplePulse([0.0, 0.1]), drive_channel)
          schedules.append(schedule)

      compressed_schedules = reschedule.compress_pulses(schedules)

- The :class:`qiskit.transpiler.Layout` has a new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.Layout.reorder_bits` that is used to reorder a
  list of virtual qubits based on the layout object.

- Two new methods have been added to the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` for
  interacting with channels.

  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.get_channel_qubits`
    to get a list of all qubits operated by the given channel and
  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.get_qubit_channel`
    to get a list of channels operating on the given qubit.

- New :class:`qiskit.extensions.HamiltonianGate` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.hamiltonian()` methods are
  introduced, representing Hamiltonian evolution of the circuit
  wavefunction by a user-specified Hermitian Operator and evolution time.
  The evolution time can be a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter`, allowing
  the creation of parameterized UCCSD or QAOA-style circuits which compile to
  ``UnitaryGate`` objects if ``time`` parameters are provided. The Unitary of
  a ``HamiltonianGate`` with Hamiltonian Operator ``H`` and time parameter
  ``t`` is :math:`e^{-iHt}`.

- The circuit library module :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library` now provides a
  new boolean logic AND circuit, :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.AND`, and
  OR circuit, :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.OR`, which implement the
  respective operations on a variable number of provided qubits.

- New fake backends are added under :mod:`qiskit.test.mock`. These include
  mocked versions of ``ibmq_armonk``, ``ibmq_essex``, ``ibmq_london``,
  ``ibmq_valencia``, ``ibmq_cambridge``, ``ibmq_paris``, ``ibmq_rome``, and
  ``ibmq_athens``. As with other fake backends, these include snapshots of
  calibration data (i.e. ``backend.defaults()``) and error data (i.e.
  ``backend.properties()``) taken from the real system, and can be used for
  local testing, compilation and simulation.

- The ``last_update_date`` parameter for
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties` can now also be
  passed in as a ``datetime`` object. Previously only a string in
  ISO8601 format was accepted.

- Adds :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.from_int` and
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.from_int` methods that allow
  constructing a computational basis state for specified system dimensions.

- The methods on the :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class for adding
  gates (for example :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.h`) which were
  previously added dynamically at run time to the class definition have been
  refactored to be statically defined methods of the class. This means that
  static analyzer (such as IDEs) can now read these methods.


.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- A new package,
  `python-dateutil <https://pypi.org/project/python-dateutil/>`_, is now
  required and has been added to the requirements list. It is being used
  to parse datetime strings received from external providers in
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties` objects.

- The marshmallow schema classes in :mod:`qiskit.providers.models` have been
  removed since they are no longer used by the BackendObjects.

- The output of the ``to_dict()`` method for the classes in
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.models` is no longer in a format for direct JSON
  serialization. Depending on the content contained in instances of these
  class there may be numpy arrays and/or complex numbers in the fields of the dict.
  If you're JSON serializing the output of the to_dict methods you should
  ensure your JSON encoder can handle numpy arrays and complex numbers. This
  includes:

  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.BackendStatus.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.QasmBackendConfiguration.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.UchannelLO.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.GateConfig.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.Command.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.JobStatus.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.Nduv.to_dict`
  * :meth:`qiskit.providers.models.Gate.to_dict`


.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The :meth:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.compose` method now takes a list
  of qubits/clbits that specify the positional order of bits to compose onto.
  The dictionary-based method of mapping using the ``edge_map`` argument is
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

- The ``combine_into_edge_map()`` method for the
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.Layout` class has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. Instead, the new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.Layout.reorder_bits` should be used to reorder
  a list of virtual qubits according to the layout object.

- Passing a :class:`qiskit.pulse.ControlChannel` object in via the
  parameter ``channel`` for the
  :class:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.control` has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. The
  ``ControlChannel`` objects are now generated from the backend configuration
  ``channels`` attribute which has the information of all channels and the
  qubits they operate on. Now, the method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration.control`
  is expected to take the parameter ``qubits`` of the form
  ``(control_qubit, target_qubit)`` and type ``list``
  or ``tuple``, and returns a list of control channels.

- The ``AND`` and ``OR`` methods of :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
  are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should
  use the circuit library boolean logic classes
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.AND` amd :class:`qiskit.circuit.library.OR`
  and then append those objects to your class. For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.circuit.library import AND

    qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0, 1)

    qc_and = AND(2)

    qc.compose(qc_and, inplace=True)

- The ``qiskit.extensions.standard`` module is deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. The gate classes in that module have been
  moved to :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library.standard_gates`.


.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.inverse`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.mirror` methods, as well as
  the ``QuantumCircuit.data`` setter would generate an invalid circuit when
  used on a parameterized circuit instance. This has been resolved and
  these methods should now work with a parameterized circuit. Fixes
  `#4235 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4235>`_

- Previously when creating a controlled version of a standard qiskit
  gate if a ``ctrl_state`` was specified a generic ``ControlledGate``
  object would be returned whereas without it a standard qiskit
  controlled gate would be returned if it was defined. This PR
  allows standard qiskit controlled gates to understand
  ``ctrl_state``.

  Additionally, this PR fixes what might be considered a bug where
  setting the ``ctrl_state`` of an already controlled gate would
  assume the specified state applied to the full control width
  instead of the control qubits being added. For instance,::

    circ = QuantumCircuit(2)
    circ.h(0)
    circ.x(1)
    gate = circ.to_gate()
    cgate = gate.control(1)
    c3gate = cgate.control(2, ctrl_state=0)

  would apply ``ctrl_state`` to all three control qubits instead of just
  the two control qubits being added.

- Fixed a bug in :func:`~qiskit.quantum_info.random_clifford` that stopped it
  from sampling the full Clifford group. Fixes
  `#4271 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4271>`_

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction` method
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction.is_parameterized` method had previously
  returned ``True`` for any ``Instruction`` instance which had a
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.Parameter` in any element of its ``params`` array,
  even if that ``Parameter`` had been fully bound. This has been corrected so
  that ``.is_parameterized`` will return ``False`` when the instruction is
  fully bound.

- :meth:`qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression.subs` had not correctly detected
  some cases where substituting parameters would result in a two distinct
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameters` objects in an expression with the same
  name. This has been corrected so a ``CircuitError`` will be raised in these
  cases.

- Improve performance of :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` for low-qubit circuit
  simulations by optimizing the class ``__init__`` methods. Fixes
  `#4281 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/4281>`_

- The function :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` now correctly handles when
  the parameter ``basis_gates`` is set to ``None``. This will allow any gate
  in the output tranpiled circuit, including gates added by the transpilation
  process. Note that using this parameter may have some
  unintended consequences during optimization. Some transpiler passes
  depend on having a ``basis_gates`` set. For example,
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.Optimize1qGates` only optimizes the chains
  of u1, u2, and u3 gates and without ``basis_gates`` it is unable to unroll
  gates that otherwise could be optimized:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import *

    q = QuantumRegister(1, name='q')
    circuit = QuantumCircuit(q)
    circuit.h(q[0])
    circuit.u1(0.1, q[0])
    circuit.u2(0.1, 0.2, q[0])
    circuit.h(q[0])
    circuit.u3(0.1, 0.2, 0.3, q[0])

    result = transpile(circuit, basis_gates=None, optimization_level=3)
    result.draw()

  .. parsed-literal::
        
   q_0:  H  U2(0.1,0.3)  H  U3(0.1,0.2,0.3) 
        

  Fixes `#3017 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3017>`_


.. _Release Notes_0.14.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The objects in :mod:`qiskit.providers.models` which were previously
  constructed using the marshmallow library have been refactored to not
  depend on marshmallow. This includes:

  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendStatus`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.QasmBackendConfiguration`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseBackendConfiguration`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.UchannelLO`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.GateConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.Command`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.JobStatus`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.Nduv`
  * :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.Gate`

  These should be drop-in replacements without any noticeable change but
  specifics inherited from marshmallow may not work. Please file issues for
  any incompatibilities found.

Aer 0.5.1
=========

No Change


Ignis 0.3.0
===========

No Change

Aqua 0.7.0
==========

Prelude
-------

The Qiskit Aqua 0.7.0 release introduces a lot of new functionality along
with an improved integration with :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
objects. The central contributions are the Qiskit's optimization module,
a complete refactor on Operators, using circuits as native input for the
algorithms and removal of the declarative JSON API.

Optimization module
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The :mod:`qiskit.optimization`` module now offers functionality for modeling
and solving quadratic programs. It provides various near-term quantum and
conventional algorithms, such as the ``MinimumEigenOptimizer``
(covering e.g. ``VQE`` or ``QAOA``) or ``CplexOptimizer``, as well as
a set of converters to translate between different
problem representations, such as ``QuadraticProgramToQubo``.
See the
`changelog <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a list of the added features.

Operator flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The operator logic provided in :mod:`qiskit.aqua.operators`` was completely
refactored and is now a full set of tools for constructing
physically-intuitive quantum computations. It contains state functions,
operators and measurements and internally relies on Terra's Operator
objects. Computing expectation values and evolutions was heavily simplified
and objects like the ``ExpectationFactory`` produce the suitable, most
efficient expectation algorithm based on the Operator input type.
See the `changelog <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a overview of the added functionality.

Native circuits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Algorithms commonly use parameterized circuits as input, for example the
VQE, VQC or QSVM. Previously, these inputs had to be of type
``VariationalForm`` or ``FeatureMap`` which were wrapping the circuit
object. Now circuits are natively supported in these algorithms, which
means any individually constructed ``QuantumCircuit`` can be passed to
these algorithms. In combination with the release of the circuit library
which offers a wide collection of circuit families, it is now easy to
construct elaborate circuits as algorithm input.

Declarative JSON API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The ability of running algorithms using dictionaries as parameters as well
as using the Aqua interfaces GUI has been removed.


IBM Q Provider 0.7.0
====================

.. _Release Notes_0.7.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- A new exception, :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackendJobLimitError`,
  is now raised if a job could not be submitted because the limit on active
  jobs has been reached.

- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` and
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.ManagedJobSet` each has two new methods
  ``update_name`` and ``update_tags``.
  They are used to change the name and tags of a job or a job set, respectively.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQFactory.save_account` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQFactory.enable_account` now accept optional
  parameters ``hub``, ``group``, and ``project``, which allow specifying a default
  provider to save to disk or use, respectively.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` methods ``creation_date`` and
  ``time_per_step`` now return date time information as a ``datetime`` object in
  local time instead of UTC. Similarly, the parameters ``start_datetime`` and
  ``end_datetime``, of
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackendService.jobs` and
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.jobs` can now be specified in local time.

- The :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.QueueInfo.format` method now uses a custom
  ``datetime`` to string formatter, and the package
  `arrow <https://pypi.org/project/arrow/>`_ is no longer required and has been
  removed from the requirements list.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.from_dict` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.to_dict` methods of
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` are deprecated and will be removed in
  the next release.


.. _Release Notes_0.7.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed an issue where ``nest_asyncio.apply()`` may raise an exception if there is
  no asyncio loop due to threading.


*************
Qiskit 0.18.3
*************

Terra 0.13.0
============

No Change

Aer 0.5.1
==========

.. _Release Notes_0.5.1_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Changes how transpilation passes are handled in the C++ Controller classes
  so that each pass must be explicitly called. This allows for greater
  customization on when each pass should be called, and with what parameters.
  In particular this enables setting different parameters for the gate
  fusion optimization pass depending on the QasmController simulation method.

- Add ``gate_length_units`` kwarg to
  :meth:`qiskit.providers.aer.noise.NoiseModel.from_device`
  for specifying custom ``gate_lengths`` in the device noise model function
  to handle unit conversions for internal code.

- Add Controlled-Y ("cy") gate to the Stabilizer simulator methods supported
  gateset.

- For Aer's backend the jsonschema validation of input qobj objects from
  terra is now opt-in instead of being enabled by default. If you want
  to enable jsonschema validation of qobj set the ``validate`` kwarg on
  the :meth:`qiskit.providers.aer.QasmSimualtor.run` method for the backend
  object to ``True``.


.. _Release Notes_0.5.1_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Remove "extended_stabilizer" from the automatically selected simulation
  methods. This is needed as the extended stabilizer method is not exact
  and may give incorrect results for certain circuits unless the user
  knows how to optimize its configuration parameters.

  The automatic method now only selects from "stabilizer", "density_matrix",
  and "statevector" methods. If a non-Clifford circuit that is too large for
  the statevector method is executed an exception will be raised suggesting
  you could try explicitly using the "extended_stabilizer" or
  "matrix_product_state" methods instead.

- Fixes Controller classes so that the ReduceBarrier transpilation pass is
  applied first. This prevents barrier instructions from preventing truncation
  of unused qubits if the only instruction defined on them was a barrier.

- Disables gate fusion for the matrix product state simulation method as this
  was causing issues with incorrect results being returned in some cases.

- Fix error in gate time unit conversion for device noise model with thermal
  relaxation errors and gate errors. The error probability the depolarizing
  error was being  calculated with gate time in microseconds, while for
  thermal relaxation it was being calculated in nanoseconds. This resulted
  in no depolarizing error being applied as the incorrect units would make
  the device seem to be coherence limited.

- Fix bug in incorrect composition of QuantumErrors when the qubits of
  composed instructions differ.

- Fix issue where the "diagonal" gate is checked to be unitary with too
  high a tolerance. This was causing diagonals generated from Numpy functions
  to often fail the test.

- Fix remove-barrier circuit optimization pass to be applied before qubit
  trucation. This fixes an issue where barriers inserted by the Terra
  transpiler across otherwise inactive qubits would prevent them from being
  truncated.

Ignis 0.3.0
===========

No Change


Aqua 0.6.6
==========

No Change


IBM Q Provider 0.6.1
====================

No Change


*************
Qiskit 0.18.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.13.0:

Terra 0.13.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.13.0 release includes many big changes. Some highlights for this
release are:

For the transpiler we have switched the graph library used to build the
:class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class which is the underlying data
structure behind all operations to be based on
`retworkx <https://pypi.org/project/retworkx/>`_ for greatly improved
performance. Circuit transpilation speed in the 0.13.0 release should
be significanlty faster than in previous releases.

There has been a significant simplification to the style in which Pulse
instructions are built. Now, ``Command`` s are deprecated and a unified
set of :class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction` s are supported.

The :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module includes several new functions
for generating random operators (such as Cliffords and quantum channels)
and for computing the diamond norm of quantum channels; upgrades to the
:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes to support
computing measurement probabilities and sampling measurements; and several
new classes are based on the symplectic representation
of Pauli matrices. These new classes include Clifford operators
(:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford`), N-qubit matrices that are
sparse in the Pauli basis (:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`),
lists of Pauli's (:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`),
and lists of stabilizers (:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerTable`).

This release also has vastly improved documentation across Qiskit,
including improved documentation for the :mod:`qiskit.circuit`,
:mod:`qiskit.pulse` and :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` modules.

Additionally, the naming of gate objects and
:class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods have been updated to be
more consistent. This has resulted in several classes and methods being
deprecated as things move to a more consistent naming scheme.

For full details on all the changes made in this release see the detailed
release notes below.


.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Added a new circuit library module :mod:`qiskit.circuit.library`. This will
  be a place for constructors of commonly used circuits that can be used as
  building blocks for larger circuits or applications.

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.BaseJob` class has four new methods:

  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BaseJob.done`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BaseJob.running`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BaseJob.cancelled`
  * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BaseJob.in_final_state`

  These methods are used to check wheter a job is in a given job status.

- Add ability to specify control conditioned on a qubit being in the
  ground state. The state of the control qubits is represented by an
  integer. For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.extensions.standard import XGate

    qc = QuantumCircuit(4)
    cgate = XGate().control(3, ctrl_state=6)
    qc.append(cgate, [0, 1, 2, 3])

  Creates a four qubit gate where the fourth qubit gets flipped if
  the first qubit is in the ground state and the second and third
  qubits are in the excited state. If ``ctrl_state`` is ``None``, the
  default, control is conditioned on all control qubits being
  excited.

- A new jupyter widget, ``%circuit_library_info`` has been added to
  :mod:`qiskit.tools.jupyter`. This widget is used for visualizing
  details about circuits built from the circuit library. For example

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.circuit.library import XOR
      import qiskit.tools.jupyter
      circuit = XOR(5, seed=42)
      %circuit_library_info circuit

- A new kwarg option, ``formatted`` ,  has been added to
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` . When set to ``True`` the
  method will print a syntax highlighted version (using pygments) to
  stdout and return ``None`` (which differs from the normal behavior of
  returning the QASM code as a string).

- A new kwarg option, ``filename`` , has been added to
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm`. When set to a path the method
  will write the QASM code to that file. It will then continue to output as
  normal.

- A new instruction :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.SetFrequency` which allows users
  to change the frequency of the :class:`~qiskit.pulse.PulseChannel`. This is
  done in the following way::

      from qiskit.pulse import Schedule
      from qiskit.pulse import SetFrequency

      sched = pulse.Schedule()
      sched += SetFrequency(5.5e9, DriveChannel(0))

  In this example, the frequency of all pulses before the ``SetFrequency``
  command will be the default frequency and all pulses applied to drive
  channel zero after the ``SetFrequency`` command will be at 5.5 GHz. Users
  of ``SetFrequency`` should keep in mind any hardware limitations.

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.assign_parameters`
  has been added to the :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class. This
  method accepts a parameter dictionary with both floats and Parameters
  objects in a single dictionary. In other words this new method allows you
  to bind floats, Parameters or both in a single dictionary.

  Also, by using the ``inplace`` kwarg it can be specified you can optionally
  modify the original circuit in place. By default this is set to ``False``
  and a copy of the original circuit will be returned from the method.

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_nonlocal_gates`
  has been added to the :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` class.
  This method will return the number of gates in a circuit that involve 2 or
  or more qubits. These gates are more costly in terms of time and error to
  implement.

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iso` for adding an
  :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Isometry` gate to the circuit has a new alias. You
  can now call :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.isometry` in addition to
  calling ``iso``.

- A ``description`` attribute has been added to the
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` class for storing a short
  description for different coupling maps (e.g. full, grid, line, etc.).

- A new method :meth:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.compose` has been added to
  the :class:`~qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit` class for composing two circuits
  via their DAGs.

  .. code-block:: python

      dag_left.compose(dag_right, edge_map={right_qubit0: self.left_qubit1,
                                        right_qubit1: self.left_qubit4,
                                        right_clbit0: self.left_clbit1,
                                        right_clbit1: self.left_clbit0})

  .. parsed-literal::

                                      
      lqr_1_0:  H      rqr_0:  Tdg M
                                 
      lqr_1_1:  X      rqr_1:  X M
                                
      lqr_1_2:  U1(0.1)   +  rcr_0:   =
                                   
      lqr_2_0:      rcr_1: 
                  
      lqr_2_1:  X 
                  
      lcr_0:   

      lcr_1:   

                  
      lqr_1_0:  H 
                          
      lqr_1_1:  X  Tdg M
                   
      lqr_1_2:  U1(0.1) 
                           
      lqr_2_0: 
                          
      lqr_2_1:  X  X M
                          
      lcr_0:   
                                       
      lcr_1:   

- The mock backends in ``qiskit.test.mock`` now have a functional ``run()``
  method that will return results similar to the real devices. If
  ``qiskit-aer`` is installed a simulation will be run with a noise model
  built from the device snapshot in the fake backend.  Otherwise,
  :class:`qiskit.providers.basicaer.QasmSimulatorPy` will be used to run an
  ideal simulation. Additionally, if a pulse experiment is passed to ``run``
  and qiskit-aer is installed the ``PulseSimulator`` will be used to simulate
  the pulse schedules.

- The :meth:`qiskit.result.Result` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.result.Result.get_counts` will now return a list of all the
  counts available when there are multiple circuits in a job. This works when
  ``get_counts()`` is called with no arguments.

  The main consideration for this feature was for drawing all the results
  from multiple circuits in the same histogram. For example it is now
  possible to do something like:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import execute
      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.providers.basicaer import BasicAer
      from qiskit.visualization import plot_histogram

      sim = BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator')

      qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.measure_all()
      result = execute([qc, qc, qc], sim).result()

      plot_histogram(result.get_counts())

- A new kwarg, ``initial_state`` has been added to the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and the
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw`. When set to ``True`` the
  initial state will be included in circuit visualizations for all backends.
  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.measure_all()
      circuit.draw(output='mpl', initial_state=True)

- It is now possible to insert a callable into a :class:`qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap`
  which returns a new :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` when it is called with parameters.
  For example:

  .. code-block::

     def test_func(x):
        sched = Schedule()
        sched += pulse_lib.constant(int(x), amp_test)(DriveChannel(0))
        return sched

     inst_map = InstructionScheduleMap()
     inst_map.add('f', (0,), test_func)
     output_sched = inst_map.get('f', (0,), 10)
     assert output_sched.duration == 10

- Two new gate classes, :class:`qiskit.extensions.iSwapGate` and
  :class:`qiskit.extensions.DCXGate`, along with their
  :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iswap` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.dcx` have been added to the standard
  extensions. These gates, which are locally equivalent to each other, can be
  used to enact particular XY interactions. A brief motivation for these gates
  can be found in:
  `arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0209035 <https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0209035>`_

- The :class:`qiskit.providers.BaseJob` class now has a new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.BaseJob.wait_for_final_state` that polls for the
  job status until the job reaches a final state (such as ``DONE`` or
  ``ERROR``). This method also takes an optional ``callback`` kwarg which
  takes a Python callable that will be called during each iteration of the
  poll loop.

- The ``search_width`` and ``search_depth`` attributes of the
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.LookaheadSwap` pass are now settable when
  initializing the pass. A larger search space can often lead to more
  optimized circuits, at the cost of longer run time.

- The number of qubits in
  :class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration` can now be accessed
  via the property
  :py:attr:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration.num_qubits`. It
  was previously only accessible via the ``n_qubits`` attribute.

- Two new methods, :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer.angles`
  and :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer.angles_and_phase`,
  have been added to the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer`
  class. These methods will return the relevant parameters without
  validation, and calling the ``OneQubitEulerDecomposer`` object will
  perform the full synthesis with validation.

- An ``RR`` decomposition basis has been added to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` for decomposing an
  arbitrary 2x2 unitary into a two :class:`~qiskit.extensions.RGate`
  circuit.

- Adds the ability to set ``qargs`` to objects which are subclasses
  of the abstract ``BaseOperator`` class. This is done by calling the
  object ``op(qargs)`` (where ``op`` is an operator class) and will return
  a shallow copy of the original object with a qargs property set. When
  such an object is used with the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` or
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` methods the internal value for
  qargs will be used when the ``qargs`` method kwarg is not used. This
  allows for subsystem composition using binary operators, for example::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import Operator

      init = Operator.from_label('III')
      x = Operator.from_label('X')
      h = Operator.from_label('H')
      init @ x([0]) @ h([1])

- Adds :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` operator class to the
  `quantum_info` module. This operator is an efficient symplectic
  representation an N-qubit unitary operator from the Clifford group. This
  class includes a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford.to_circuit` method
  for compilation into a :class:`~qiskit.QuantumCircuit` of Clifford gates
  with a minimal number of CX gates for up to 3-qubits. It also providers
  general compilation for N > 3 qubits but this method is not optimal in
  the number of two-qubit gates.

- Adds :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` operator class. This is an
  efficient representaiton of an N-qubit matrix that is sparse in the Pauli
  basis and uses a :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` and vector of
  complex coefficients for its data structure.

  This class supports much of the same functionality of the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` class so
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` objects can be tensored,
  composed, scalar multiplied, added and subtracted.

  Numpy arrays or :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` objects can be
  converted to a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` using the
  `:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.from_operator` method.
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` can be convered to a sparse
  csr_matrix or dense Numpy array using the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.to_matrix` method, or to an
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` object using the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.to_operator` method.

  A :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp` can be iterated over
  in terms of its :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` components and
  coefficients, its coefficients and Pauli string labels using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.label_iter` method, and the
  (dense or sparse) matrix components using the
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp.matrix_iter` method.

- Add :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.diamond_norm` function for computing the
  diamond norm (completely-bounded trace-norm) of a quantum channel. This
  can be used to compute the distance between two quantum channels using
  ``diamond_norm(chan1 - chan2)``.

- A new class :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` has been added. This
  is an efficient symplectic representation of a list of N-qubit Pauli
  operators. Some features of this class are:

    * :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` objects may be composed, and
      tensored which will return a :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`
      object with the combination of the operation (
      :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.compose`,
      :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.dot`,
      :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.expand`,
      :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.tensor`) between each element
      of  the first table, with each element of the second table.

    * Addition of two tables acts as list concatination of the terms in each
      table (``+``).

    * Pauli tables can be sorted by lexicographic (tensor product) order or
      by Pauli weights (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.sort`).

    * Duplicate elements can be counted and deleted
      (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.unique`).

    * The PauliTable may be iterated over in either its native symplectic
      boolean array representation, as Pauli string labels
      (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.label_iter`), or as dense
      Numpy array or sparse CSR matrices
      (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.matrix_iter`).

    * Checking commutation between elements of the Pauli table and another
      Pauli (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.commutes`) or Pauli
      table (:meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable.commutes_with_all`)

  See the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` class API documentation for
  additional details.

- Adds :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerTable` class. This is a subclass
  of the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` class which includes a
  boolean phase vector along with the Pauli table array. This represents a
  list of Stabilizer operators which are real-Pauli operators with +1 or -1
  coefficient. Because the stabilizer matrices are real the ``"Y"`` label
  matrix is defined as ``[[0, 1], [-1, 0]]``. See the API documentation for
  additional information.

- Adds :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.pauli_basis` function which returns an N-qubit
  Pauli basis as a :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable` object. The ordering
  of this basis can either be by standard lexicographic (tensor product) order,
  or by the number of non-identity Pauli terms (weight).

- Adds :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.ScalarOp` operator class that represents
  a scalar multiple of an identity operator. This can be used to initialize
  an identity on arbitrary dimension subsystems and it will be implicitly
  converted to other ``BaseOperator`` subclasses (such as an
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` or
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.SuperOp`) when it is composed with,
  or added to, them.

  Example: Identity operator

  .. code-block::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import ScalarOp, Operator

      X = Operator.from_label('X')
      Z = Operator.from_label('Z')

      init = ScalarOp(2 ** 3)  # 3-qubit identity
      op = init @ X([0]) @ Z([1]) @ X([2])  # Op XZX

- A new method, :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.reshape`, has been added
  to the :class:`qiskit.quantum_innfo.Operator` class that returns a shallow
  copy of an operator subclass with reshaped subsystem input or output dimensions.
  The combined dimensions of all subsystems must be the same as the original
  operator or an exception will be raised.

- Adds :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_clifford` for generating a random
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford` operator.

- Add :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_quantum_channel` function
  for generating a random quantum channel with fixed
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Choi`-rank in the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Stinespring` representation.

- Add :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_hermitian` for generating
  a random Hermitian :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`.

- Add :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_statevector` for generating
  a random :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`.

- Adds :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_pauli_table` for generating a random
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`.

- Adds :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_stabilizer_table` for generating a random
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerTable`.

- Add a ``num_qubits`` attribute to :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.StateVector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes. This returns the number of
  qubits for N-qubit states and returns ``None`` for non-qubit states.

- Adds :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.to_dict` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.to_dict` methods to convert
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` objects into Bra-Ket notation
  dictionary.

  Example

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    state = Statevector.from_label('+0')
    print(state.to_dict())

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import DensityMatrix

    state = DensityMatrix.from_label('+0')
    print(state.to_dict())

- Adds :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.probabilities` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.probabilities` to
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes which return an
  array of measurement outcome probabilities in the computational
  basis for the specified subsystems.

  Example

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    state = Statevector.from_label('+0')
    print(state.probabilities())

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import DensityMatrix

    state = DensityMatrix.from_label('+0')
    print(state.probabilities())

- Adds :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.probabilities_dict` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.probabilities_dict` to
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes which return a
  count-style dictionary array of measurement outcome probabilities
  in the computational basis for the specified subsystems.

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    state = Statevector.from_label('+0')
    print(state.probabilities_dict())

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import DensityMatrix

    state = DensityMatrix.from_label('+0')
    print(state.probabilities_dict())

- Add :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.sample_counts` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.sample_memory` methods to the
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`
  and :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes for sampling
  measurement outcomes on subsystems.

  Example:

    Generate a counts dictionary by sampling from a statevector

    .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

      psi = Statevector.from_label('+0')
      shots = 1024

      # Sample counts dictionary
      counts = psi.sample_counts(shots)
      print('Measure both:', counts)

      # Qubit-0
      counts0 = psi.sample_counts(shots, [0])
      print('Measure Qubit-0:', counts0)

      # Qubit-1
      counts1 = psi.sample_counts(shots, [1])
      print('Measure Qubit-1:', counts1)

    Return the array of measurement outcomes for each sample

    .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

      psi = Statevector.from_label('-1')
      shots = 10

      # Sample memory
      mem = psi.sample_memory(shots)
      print('Measure both:', mem)

      # Qubit-0
      mem0 = psi.sample_memory(shots, [0])
      print('Measure Qubit-0:', mem0)

      # Qubit-1
      mem1 = psi.sample_memory(shots, [1])
      print('Measure Qubit-1:', mem1)

- Adds a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.measure` method to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` quantum state classes. This
  allows sampling a single measurement outcome from the specified subsystems
  and collapsing the statevector to the post-measurement computational basis
  state. For example

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    psi = Statevector.from_label('+1')

    # Measure both qubits
    outcome, psi_meas = psi.measure()
    print("measure([0, 1]) outcome:", outcome, "Post-measurement state:")
    print(psi_meas)

    # Measure qubit-1 only
    outcome, psi_meas = psi.measure([1])
    print("measure([1]) outcome:", outcome, "Post-measurement state:")
    print(psi_meas)

- Adds a :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.reset` method to the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` quantum state classes. This
  allows reseting some or all subsystems to the :math:`|0\rangle` state.
  For example

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector

    psi = Statevector.from_label('+1')

    # Reset both qubits
    psi_reset = psi.reset()
    print("Post reset state: ")
    print(psi_reset)

    # Reset qubit-1 only
    psi_reset = psi.reset([1])
    print("Post reset([1]) state: ")
    print(psi_reset)

- A new visualization function
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.visualize_transition` for visualizing
  single qubit gate transitions has been added. It takes in a single qubit
  circuit and returns an animation of qubit state transitions on a Bloch
  sphere. To use this function you must have installed
  the dependencies for and configured globally a matplotlib animtion
  writer. You can refer to the `matplotlib documentation
  <https://matplotlib.org/api/animation_api.html#writer-classes>`_ for
  more details on this. However, in the default case simply ensuring
  that `FFmpeg <https://www.ffmpeg.org/>`_ is installed is sufficient to
  use this function.

  It supports circuits with the following gates:

  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.HGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.XGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.YGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.ZGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.RXGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.RYGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.RZGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.SGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.SdgGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.TGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.TdgGate`
  * :class:`~qiskit.extensions.U1Gate`

  For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.visualization import visualize_transition
    from qiskit import *

    qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.ry(70,0)
    qc.rx(90,0)
    qc.rz(120,0)

    visualize_transition(qc, fpg=20, spg=1, trace=True)

- :func:`~qiskit.execute.execute` has a new kwarg ``schedule_circuit``. By
  setting ``schedule_circuit=True`` this enables scheduling of the circuit
  into a :class:`~qiskit.pulse.Schedule`. This allows users building
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` objects to make use of custom
  scheduler  methods, such as the ``as_late_as_possible`` and
  ``as_soon_as_possible`` methods.
  For example::

      job = execute(qc, backend, schedule_circuit=True,
                    scheduling_method="as_late_as_possible")

- A new environment variable ``QISKIT_SUPPRESS_PACKAGING_WARNINGS`` can be
  set to ``Y`` or ``y`` which will suppress the warnings about
  ``qiskit-aer`` and ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` not being installed at import
  time. This is useful for users who are only running qiskit-terra (or just
  not qiskit-aer and/or qiskit-ibmq-provider) and the warnings are not an
  indication of a potential packaging problem. You can set the environment
  variable to ``N`` or ``n`` to ensure that warnings are always enabled
  even if the user config file is set to disable them.

- A new user config file option, ``suppress_packaging_warnings`` has been
  added. When set to ``true`` in your user config file like::

      [default]
      suppress_packaging_warnings = true

  it will suppress the warnings about  ``qiskit-aer`` and
  ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` not being installed at import time. This is useful
  for users who are only running qiskit-terra (or just not qiskit-aer and/or
  qiskit-ibmq-provider) and the warnings are not an indication of a potential
  packaging problem. If the user config file is set to disable the warnings
  this can be overriden by setting the ``QISKIT_SUPPRESS_PACKAGING_WARNINGS``
  to ``N`` or ``n``

- :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile()` has two new kwargs, ``layout_method``
  and ``routing_method``. These allow you to select a particular method for
  placement and routing of circuits on constrained architectures. For,
  example::

      transpile(circ, backend, layout_method='dense',
                routing_method='lookahead')

  will run :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.DenseLayout` layout pass and
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.LookaheadSwap` routing pass.

- There has been a significant simplification to the style in which Pulse
  instructions are built.

  With the previous style, ``Command`` s were called with channels to make
  an :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Instruction`. The usage of both
  commands and instructions was a point of confusion. This was the previous
  style::

      sched += Delay(5)(DriveChannel(0))
      sched += ShiftPhase(np.pi)(DriveChannel(0))
      sched += SamplePulse([1.0, ...])(DriveChannel(0))
      sched += Acquire(100)(AcquireChannel(0), MemorySlot(0))

  or, equivalently (though less used)::

      sched += DelayInstruction(Delay(5), DriveChannel(0))
      sched += ShiftPhaseInstruction(ShiftPhase(np.pi), DriveChannel(0))
      sched += PulseInstruction(SamplePulse([1.0, ...]), DriveChannel(0))
      sched += AcquireInstruction(Acquire(100), AcquireChannel(0),
                                  MemorySlot(0))

  Now, rather than build a command *and* an instruction, each command has
  been migrated into an instruction::

      sched += Delay(5, DriveChannel(0))
      sched += ShiftPhase(np.pi, DriveChannel(0))
      sched += Play(SamplePulse([1.0, ...]), DriveChannel(0))
      sched += SetFrequency(5.5, DriveChannel(0))  # New instruction!
      sched += Acquire(100, AcquireChannel(0), MemorySlot(0))

- There is now a :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Play` instruction
  which takes a description of a pulse envelope and a channel. There is a
  new :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.Pulse` class in the
  :mod:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib` from which the pulse envelope description
  should subclass.

  For example::

      Play(SamplePulse([0.1]*10), DriveChannel(0))
      Play(ConstantPulse(duration=10, amp=0.1), DriveChannel(0))


.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` method ``pop`` which was deprecated
  in the 0.9.0 release has been removed. If you were using this method you
  can leverage Python's ``del`` statement or ``delattr()`` function
  to perform the same task.

- A new optional visualization requirement,
  `pygments <https://pygments.org/>`_ , has been added. It is used for
  providing syntax highlighting of OpenQASM 2.0 code in Jupyter widgets and
  optionally for the :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm` method. It
  must be installed (either with ``pip install pygments`` or
  ``pip install qiskit-terra[visualization]``) prior to using the
  ``%circuit_library_info`` widget in :mod:`qiskit.tools.jupyter` or
  the ``formatted`` kwarg on the :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.qasm`
  method.

- The pulse ``buffer`` option found in :class:`qiskit.pulse.Channel` and
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` was deprecated in Terra 0.11.0 and has now
  been removed. To add a delay on a channel or in a schedule, specify it
  explicitly in your Schedule with a Delay::

      sched = Schedule()
      sched += Delay(5)(DriveChannel(0))

- ``PulseChannelSpec``, which was deprecated in Terra 0.11.0, has now been
  removed. Use BackendConfiguration instead::

      config = backend.configuration()
      drive_chan_0 = config.drives(0)
      acq_chan_0 = config.acquires(0)

  or, simply reference the channel directly, such as ``DriveChannel(index)``.

- An import path was deprecated in Terra 0.10.0 and has now been removed: for
  ``PulseChannel``, ``DriveChannel``, ``MeasureChannel``, and
  ``ControlChannel``, use ``from qiskit.pulse.channels import X`` in place of
  ``from qiskit.pulse.channels.pulse_channels import X``.

- The pass :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` (which was introduced
  in the 0.11.0 release) has been added to the preset pass manager for
  optimization levels 2 and 3. For level 2, there is a call limit of 1,000
  and a timeout of 10 seconds. For level 3, the call limit is 10,000 and the
  timeout is 1 minute.

  Now that the pass is included in the preset pass managers the
  `python-constraint <https://pypi.org/project/python-constraint/>`_ package
  is not longer an optional dependency and has been added to the requirements
  list.

- The ``TranspileConfig`` class which was previously used to set
  run time configuration for a :class:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` has
  been removed and replaced by a new class
  :class:`qiskit.transpile.PassManagerConfig`. This new class has been
  structured to include only the information needed to construct a
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`. The attributes of this class are:

  * ``initial_layout``
  * ``basis_gates``
  * ``coupling_map``
  * ``backend_properties``
  * ``seed_transpiler``

- The function ``transpile_circuit`` in
  :mod:`qiskit.transpiler` has been removed. To transpile a circuit with a
  custom :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` now you should use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run` method of the
  :class:~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` object.

- The :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
  :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function will no longer include
  the initial state included in visualizations by default. If you would like to
  retain the initial state in the output visualization you need to set the
  ``initial_state`` kwarg to ``True``. For example, running:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.measure_all()
      circuit.draw(output='text')

  This no longer includes the initial state. If you'd like to retain it you can run:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

      circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
      circuit.measure_all()
      circuit.draw(output='text', initial_state=True)


- :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile` (and :func:`qiskit.execute.execute`,
  which uses ``transpile`` internally) will now raise an error when the
  ``pass_manager`` kwarg is set and a value is set for other kwargs that
  are already set in an instantiated :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`
  object. Previously, these conflicting kwargs would just be silently
  ignored and the values in the ``PassManager`` instance would be used. For
  example::

      from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.transpiler.pass_manager_config import PassManagerConfig
      from qiskit.transpiler import preset_passmanagers
      from qiskit.compiler import transpile

      qc = QuantumCircuit(5)

      config = PassManagerConfig(basis_gates=['u3', 'cx'])
      pm = preset_passmanagers.level_0_pass_manager(config)
      transpile(qc, optimization_level=3, pass_manager=pm)

  will now raise an error while prior to this release the value in ``pm``
  would just silently be used and the value for the ``optimization_level``
  kwarg would be ignored. The ``transpile`` kwargs this applies to are:

  * ``optimization_level``
  * ``basis_gates``
  * ``coupling_map``
  * ``seed_transpiler``
  * ``backend_properties``
  * ``initial_layout``
  * ``layout_method``
  * ``routing_method``
  * ``backend``

- The :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Clifford`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.PauliTable`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.StabilizerTable`, operator classes have an added
  ``call`` method that allows them to assign a `qargs` to the operator for use
  with the :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.evolve`,``+``, and ``-`` operations.

- The addition method of the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`, class now accepts a
  ``qarg`` kwarg to allow adding a smaller operator to a larger one assuming identities
  on the other subsystems (same as for ``qargs`` on
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` and
  :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` methods). This allows
  subsystem addition using the call method as with composition. This support is
  added to all BaseOperator subclasses (:class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.ScalarOp`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Operator`,
  :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.QuantumChannel`).

  For example:

  .. code-block::

    from qiskit.quantum_info import Operator, ScalarOp

    ZZ = Operator.from_label('ZZ')

    # Initialize empty Hamiltonian
    n_qubits = 10
    ham = ScalarOp(2 ** n_qubits, coeff=0)

    # Add 2-body nearest neighbour terms
    for j in range(n_qubits - 1):
        ham = ham + ZZ([j, j+1])

- The ``BaseOperator`` class has been updated so that addition,
  subtraction and scalar multiplication are no longer abstract methods. This
  means that they are no longer required to be implemented in subclasses if
  they are not supported. The base class will raise a ``NotImplementedError``
  when the methods are not defined.

- The :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_density_matrix` function will
  now return a random :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` object. In
  previous releases it returned a numpy array.

- The :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes no longer copy the
  input array if it is already the correct dtype.

- `fastjsonschema <https://pypi.org/project/fastjsonschema/>`_ is added as a
  dependency. This is used for much faster validation of qobj dictionaries
  against the JSON schema when the ``to_dict()`` method is called on qobj
  objects with the ``validate`` keyword argument set to ``True``.

- The qobj construction classes in :mod:`qiskit.qobj` will no longer validate
  against the qobj jsonschema by default. These include the following classes:

  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QobjExperimentHeader`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QobjHeader`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QobjMeasurementOption`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseLibraryItem`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj`
  * :class:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj`

  If you were relying on this validation or would like to validate them
  against the qobj schema this can be done by setting the ``validate`` kwarg
  to ``True`` on :meth:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj.to_dict` method from either of
  the top level Qobj classes :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj` or
  :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj`. For example:

  .. code-block:

      from qiskit import qobj

      my_qasm = qobj.QasmQobj(
          qobj_id='12345',
          header=qobj.QobjHeader(),
          config=qobj.QasmQobjConfig(shots=1024, memory_slots=2,
                                     max_credits=10),
          experiments=[
              qobj.QasmQobjExperiment(instructions=[
                  qobj.QasmQobjInstruction(name='u1', qubits=[1],
                                           params=[0.4]),
                  qobj.QasmQobjInstruction(name='u2', qubits=[1],
                                           params=[0.4, 0.2])
              ])
          ]
      )
      qasm_dict = my_qasm.to_dict(validate=True)

  which will validate the output dictionary against the Qobj jsonschema.

- The output dictionary from :meth:`qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj.to_dict` and
  :meth:`qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj.to_dict` is no longer in a format for direct
  json serialization as expected by IBMQ's API. These Qobj objects are
  the current format we use for passing experiments to providers/backends
  and while having a dictionary format that could just be passed to the IBMQ
  API directly was moderately useful for ``qiskit-ibmq-provider``, it made
  things more difficult for other providers. Especially for providers that
  wrap local simulators. Moving forward the definitions of what is passed
  between providers and the IBMQ API request format will be further decoupled
  (in a backwards compatible manner) which should ease the burden of writing
  providers and backends.

  In practice, the only functional difference between the output of these
  methods now and previous releases is that complex numbers are represented
  with the ``complex`` type and numpy arrays are not silently converted to
  list anymore. If you were previously calling ``json.dumps()`` directly on
  the output of ``to_dict()`` after this release a custom json encoder will
  be needed to handle these cases. For example::

      import json

      from qiskit.circuit import ParameterExpression
      from qiskit import qobj

      my_qasm = qobj.QasmQobj(
          qobj_id='12345',
          header=qobj.QobjHeader(),
          config=qobj.QasmQobjConfig(shots=1024, memory_slots=2,
                                     max_credits=10),
          experiments=[
              qobj.QasmQobjExperiment(instructions=[
                  qobj.QasmQobjInstruction(name='u1', qubits=[1],
                                           params=[0.4]),
                  qobj.QasmQobjInstruction(name='u2', qubits=[1],
                                           params=[0.4, 0.2])
              ])
          ]
      )
      qasm_dict = my_qasm.to_dict()

      class QobjEncoder(json.JSONEncoder):
          """A json encoder for pulse qobj"""
          def default(self, obj):
              # Convert numpy arrays:
              if hasattr(obj, 'tolist'):
                  return obj.tolist()
              # Use Qobj complex json format:
              if isinstance(obj, complex):
                  return (obj.real, obj.imag)
              if isinstance(obj, ParameterExpression):
                  return float(obj)
              return json.JSONEncoder.default(self, obj)

      json_str = json.dumps(qasm_dict, cls=QobjEncoder)

  will generate a json string in the same exact manner that
  ``json.dumps(my_qasm.to_dict())`` did in previous releases.

- ``CmdDef`` has been deprecated since Terra 0.11.0 and has been removed.
  Please continue to use :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap`
  instead.

- The methods ``cmds`` and ``cmd_qubits`` in
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap` have been deprecated
  since Terra 0.11.0 and have been removed. Please use ``instructions``
  and ``qubits_with_instruction`` instead.

- PulseDefaults have reported ``qubit_freq_est`` and ``meas_freq_est`` in
  Hz rather than GHz since Terra release 0.11.0. A warning which notified
  of this change has been removed.

- The previously deprecated (in the 0.11.0 release) support for passsing in
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.Instruction` parameters of types ``sympy.Basic``,
  ``sympy.Expr``, ``qiskit.qasm.node.node.Node`` (QASM AST node) and
  ``sympy.Matrix`` has been removed. The supported types for instruction
  parameters are:

  * ``int``
  * ``float``
  * ``complex``
  * ``str``
  * ``list``
  * ``np.ndarray``
  * :class:`qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression`

- The following properties of
  :py:class:`~qiskit.providers.models.BackendConfiguration`:

  * ``dt``
  * ``dtm``
  * ``rep_time``

  all have units of seconds. Prior to release 0.11.0, ``dt`` and ``dtm`` had
  units of nanoseconds. Prior to release 0.12.0, ``rep_time`` had units of
  microseconds. The warnings alerting users of these changes have now been
  removed from ``BackendConfiguration``.

- A new requirement has been added to the requirements list,
  `retworkx <https://pypi.org/project/retworkx/>`_. It is an Apache 2.0
  licensed graph library that has a similar API to networkx and is being used
  to significantly speed up the :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`
  operations as part of the transpiler. There are binaries published on PyPI
  for all the platforms supported by Qiskit Terra but if you're using a
  platform where there aren't precompiled binaries published refer to the
  `retworkx documentation
  <https://retworkx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/README.html#installing-retworkx>`_
  for instructions on pip installing from sdist.

  If you encounter any issues with the transpiler or DAGCircuit class as part
  of the transition you can switch back to the previous networkx
  implementation by setting the environment variable ``USE_RETWORKX`` to
  ``N``. This option will be removed in the 0.14.0 release.


.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Passing in the data to the constructor for
  :class:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGNode` as a dictionary arg ``data_dict``
  is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should
  now pass the fields in as kwargs to the constructor. For example the
  previous behavior of::

    from qiskit.dagcircuit import DAGNode

    data_dict = {
        'type': 'in',
        'name': 'q_0',
    }
    node = DAGNode(data_dict)

  should now be::

    from qiskit.dagcircuit import DAGNode

    node = DAGNode(type='in', name='q_0')

- The naming of gate objects and methods have been updated to be more
  consistent. The following changes have been made:

  * The Pauli gates all have one uppercase letter only (``I``, ``X``, ``Y``,
    ``Z``)
  * The parameterized Pauli gates (i.e. rotations) prepend the uppercase
    letter ``R`` (``RX``, ``RY``, ``RZ``)
  * A controlled version prepends the uppercase letter ``C`` (``CX``,
    ``CRX``, ``CCX``)
  * Gates are named according to their action, not their alternative names
    (``CCX``, not ``Toffoli``)

  The old names have been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  This is a list of the changes showing the old and new class, name attribute,
  and methods. If a new column is blank then there is no change for that.

  .. list-table:: Gate Name Changes
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Old Class
       - New Class
       - Old Name Attribute
       - New Name Attribute
       - Old :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
       - New :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` method
     * - ``ToffoliGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CCXGate`
       - ``ccx``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ccx` and
         :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.toffoli`
       -
     * - ``CrxGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CRXGate`
       - ``crx``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.crx`
       -
     * - ``CryGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CRYGate`
       - ``cry``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cry`
       -
     * - ``CrzGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CRZGate`
       - ``crz``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.crz`
       -
     * - ``FredkinGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CSwapGate`
       - ``cswap``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cswap` and
         :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.fredkin`
       -
     * - ``Cu1Gate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CU1Gate`
       - ``cu1``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cu1`
       -
     * - ``Cu3Gate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CU3Gate`
       - ``cu3``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cu3`
       -
     * - ``CnotGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CXGate`
       - ``cx``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cx` and
         :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cnot`
       -
     * - ``CyGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CYGate`
       - ``cy``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cy`
       -
     * - ``CzGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CZGate`
       - ``cz``
       -
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cz`
       -
     * - ``DiagGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.DiagonalGate`
       - ``diag``
       - ``diagonal``
       - ``diag_gate``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.diagonal`
     * - ``IdGate``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.IGate`
       - ``id``
       -
       - ``iden``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.i` and
         :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.id`
     * - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.Isometry`
       -
       - ``iso``
       - ``isometry``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iso`
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.isometry`
         and :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iso`
     * - ``UCG``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UCGate`
       - ``multiplexer``
       -
       - ``ucg``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.uc`
     * - ``UCRot``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UCPauliRotGate`
       -
       -
       -
       -
     * - ``UCX``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UCRXGate`
       - ``ucrotX``
       - ``ucrx``
       - ``ucx``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ucrx`
     * - ``UCY``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UCRYGate`
       - ``ucroty``
       - ``ucry``
       - ``ucy``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ucry`
     * - ``UCZ``
       - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.UCRZGate`
       - ``ucrotz``
       - ``ucrz``
       - ``ucz``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ucrz`

- The kwarg ``period`` for the function
  :func:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.square`,
  :func:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.sawtooth`, and
  :func:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.triangle` in
  :mod:`qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib` is now deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Instead you should now use the ``freq`` kwarg to set
  the frequency.

- The ``DAGCircuit.compose_back()`` and ``DAGCircuit.extend_back()`` methods
  are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should
  use the :meth:`qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit.compose` method, which is a more
  general and more flexible method that provides the same functionality.

- The ``callback`` kwarg of the :class:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` class's
  constructor has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  Instead of setting it at the object level during creation it should now
  be set as a kwarg parameter on the :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run`
  method.

- The ``n_qubits`` and ``numberofqubits`` keywords are deprecated throughout
  Terra and replaced by ``num_qubits``. The old names will be removed in
  a future release. The objects affected by this change are listed below:

  .. list-table:: New Methods
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Class
       - Old Method
       - New Method
     * - :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit`
       - ``n_qubits``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.num_qubits`
     * - :class:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli`
       - ``numberofqubits``
       - :meth:`~qiskit.quantum_info.Pauli.num_qubits`

  .. list-table:: New arguments
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Function
       - Old Argument
       - New Argument
     * - :func:`~qiskit.circuit.random.random_circuit`
       - ``n_qubits``
       - ``num_qubits``
     * - :class:`~qiskit.extensions.MSGate`
       - ``n_qubit``
       - ``num_qubits``

- The function ``qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis.euler_angles_1q`` is now
  deprecated. It has been superseded by the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` class which provides
  the same functionality through::

      OneQubitEulerDecomposer().angles(mat)

- The ``pass_manager`` kwarg for the :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile`
  has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Moving forward
  the preferred way to transpile a circuit with a custom
  :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager` object is to use the
  :meth:`~qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run` method of the ``PassManager``
  object.

- The :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_state` function has been deprecated
  and will be removed in a future release. Instead you should use the
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.random_statevector` function.

- The ``add``, ``subtract``, and ``multiply`` methods of the
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes are deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Instead you shoulde use ``+``, ``-``, ``*``
  binary operators instead.

- Deprecates :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.to_counts`,
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.to_counts`, and
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.counts.state_to_counts`. These functions
  are superseded by the class methods
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.probabilities_dict` and
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.probabilities_dict`.

- :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.SamplePulse` and
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.ParametricPulse` s (e.g. ``Gaussian``)
  now subclass from :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.Pulse` and have been
  moved to the :mod:`qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib`. The previous path via
  ``pulse.commands`` is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

- ``DelayInstruction`` has been deprecated and replaced by
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instruction.Delay`. This new instruction has been
  taken over the previous ``Command`` ``Delay``. The migration pattern is::

      Delay(<duration>)(<channel>) -> Delay(<duration>, <channel>)
      DelayInstruction(Delay(<duration>), <channel>)
          -> Delay(<duration>, <channel>)

  Until the deprecation period is over, the previous ``Delay`` syntax of
  calling a command on a channel will also be supported::

      Delay(<phase>)(<channel>)

  The new ``Delay`` instruction does not support a ``command`` attribute.

- ``FrameChange`` and ``FrameChangeInstruction`` have been deprecated and
  replaced by :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.ShiftPhase`. The changes
  are::

      FrameChange(<phase>)(<channel>) -> ShiftPhase(<phase>, <channel>)
      FrameChangeInstruction(FrameChange(<phase>), <channel>)
          -> ShiftPhase(<phase>, <channel>)

  Until the deprecation period is over, the previous FrameChange syntax of
  calling a command on a channel will be supported::

      ShiftPhase(<phase>)(<channel>)

- The ``call`` method of :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.SamplePulse` and
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.ParametricPulse` s have been deprecated.
  The migration is as follows::

      Pulse(<*args>)(<channel>) -> Play(Pulse(*args), <channel>)

- ``AcquireInstruction`` has been deprecated and replaced by
  :py:class:`~qiskit.pulse.instructions.Acquire`. The changes are::

      Acquire(<duration>)(<**channels>) -> Acquire(<duration>, <**channels>)
      AcquireInstruction(Acquire(<duration>), <**channels>)
          -> Acquire(<duration>, <**channels>)

  Until the deprecation period is over, the previous Acquire syntax of
  calling the command on a channel will be supported::

      Acquire(<duration>)(<**channels>)


.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The :class:`~qiskit.transpiler.passes.BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements`
  transpiler pass, included in the preset transpiler levels when targeting
  a physical device, previously inserted a barrier across only measured
  qubits. In some cases, this allowed the transpiler to insert a swap after a
  measure operation, rendering the circuit invalid for current
  devices. The pass has been updated so that the inserted barrier
  will span all qubits on the device. Fixes
  `#3937 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3937>`_

- When extending a :class:`~qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` instance
  (extendee) with another circuit (extension), the circuit is taken via
  reference. If a circuit is extended with itself that leads to an infinite
  loop as extendee and extension are the same. This bug has been resolved by
  copying the extension if it is the same object as the extendee.
  Fixes `#3811 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3811>`_

- Fixes a case in :meth:`qiskit.result.Result.get_counts`, where the results
  for an expirement could not be referenced if the experiment was initialized
  as a Schedule without a name. Fixes
  `#2753 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/2753>`_

- Previously, replacing :class:`~qiskit.circuit.Parameter` objects in a
  circuit with new Parameter objects prior to decomposing a circuit would
  result in the substituted values not correctly being substituted into the
  decomposed gates. This has been resolved such that binding and
  decomposition may occur in any order.

- The matplotlib output backend for the
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` function and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` method drawer has been fixed
  to render :class:`~qiskit.extensions.CU1Gate` gates correctly.
  Fixes `#3684 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3684>`_

- A bug in :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str` and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file` when
  loading QASM with custom gates defined has been fixed. Now, loading
  this QASM::

      OPENQASM 2.0;
      include "qelib1.inc";
      gate rinv q {sdg q; h q; sdg q; h q; }
      qreg q[1];
      rinv q[0];

  is equivalent to the following circuit::

      rinv_q = QuantumRegister(1, name='q')
      rinv_gate = QuantumCircuit(rinv_q, name='rinv')
      rinv_gate.sdg(rinv_q)
      rinv_gate.h(rinv_q)
      rinv_gate.sdg(rinv_q)
      rinv_gate.h(rinv_q)
      rinv = rinv_gate.to_instruction()
      qr = QuantumRegister(1, name='q')
      expected = QuantumCircuit(qr, name='circuit')
      expected.append(rinv, [qr[0]])

  Fixes `#1566 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/1566>`_

- Allow quantum circuit Instructions to have list parameter values. This is
  used in Aer for expectation value snapshot parameters for example
  ``params = [[1.0, 'I'], [1.0, 'X']]]`` for :math:`\langle I + X\rangle`.

- Previously, for circuits containing composite gates (those created via
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.to_gate` or
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.to_instruction` or their corresponding
  converters), attempting to bind the circuit more than once would result in
  only the first bind value being applied to all circuits when transpiled.
  This has been resolved so that the values provided for subsequent binds are
  correctly respected.


.. _Release Notes_0.13.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The qasm and pulse qobj classes:

  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QobjExperimentHeader`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QobjHeader`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobjConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QobjMeasurementOption`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseLibraryItem`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjInstruction`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperimentConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjExperiment`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobjConfig`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.QasmQobj`
  * :class:`~qiskit.qobj.PulseQobj`

  from :mod:`qiskit.qobj` have all been reimplemented without using the
  marsmallow library. These new implementations are designed to be drop-in
  replacement (except for as noted in the upgrade release notes) but
  specifics inherited from marshmallow may not work. Please file issues for
  any incompatibilities found.

Aer 0.5.0
=========

Added
-----
 - Add support for terra diagonal gate
 - Add support for parameterized qobj

Fixed
-----
 - Added postfix for linux on Raspberry Pi
 - Handle numpy array inputs from qobj

Ignis 0.3.0
===========

Added
-----

* API documentation
* CNOT-Dihedral randomized benchmarking
* Accreditation module for output accrediation of noisy devices
* Pulse calibrations for single qubits
* Pulse Discriminator
* Entanglement verification circuits
* Gateset tomography for single-qubit gate sets
* Adds randomized benchmarking utility functions ``calculate_1q_epg``,
  ``calculate_2q_epg`` functions to calculate 1 and 2-qubit error per gate from
  error per Clifford
* Adds randomized benchmarking utility functions ``calculate_1q_epc``,
  ``calculate_2q_epc`` for calculating 1 and 2-qubit error per Clifford from error
  per gate

Changed
-------
* Support integer labels for qubits in tomography
* Support integer labels for measurement error mitigation

Deprecated
----------
* Deprecates ``twoQ_clifford_error`` function. Use ``calculate_2q_epc`` instead.
* Python 3.5 support in qiskit-ignis is deprecated. Support will be removed on
  the upstream python community's end of life date for the version, which is
  09/13/2020.

Aqua 0.6.5
==========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.6.0
====================

No Change

*************
Qiskit 0.17.0
*************

Terra 0.12.0
============

No Change

Aer 0.4.1
=========

No Change

Ignis 0.2.0
===========

No Change

Aqua 0.6.5
==========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.6.0
====================

New Features
------------

- There are three new exceptions: ``VisualizationError``, ``VisualizationValueError``,
  and ``VisualizationTypeError``. These are now used in the visualization modules when
  an exception is raised.
- You can now set the logging level and specify a log file using the environment
  variables ``QSIKIT_IBMQ_PROVIDER_LOG_LEVEL`` and ``QISKIT_IBMQ_PROVIDER_LOG_FILE``,
  respectively. Note that the name of the logger is ``qiskit.providers.ibmq``.
- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob` now has a new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.scheduling_mode` that returns the scheduling
  mode the job is in.
- IQX-related tutorials that used to be in ``qiskit-iqx-tutorials`` are now in
  ``qiskit-ibmq-provider``.

Changed
-------

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.jobs` now accepts a new boolean parameter
  ``descending``, which can be used to indicate whether the jobs should be returned in
  descending or ascending order.
- :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager` now looks at the job limit and waits
  for old jobs to finish before submitting new ones if the limit has been reached.
- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.status` now raises a
  :class:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackendApiProtocolError` exception
  if there was an issue with validating the status.

*************
Qiskit 0.16.0
*************

Terra 0.12.0
============

No Change

Aer 0.4.0
=========

No Change

Ignis 0.2.0
===========

No Change

Aqua 0.6.4
==========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.5.0
====================

New Features
------------

- Some of the visualization and Jupyter tools, including gate/error map and
  backend information, have been moved from ``qiskit-terra`` to ``qiskit-ibmq-provider``.
  They are now under the :mod:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.jupyter` and
  :mod:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.visualization`. In addition, you can now
  use ``%iqx_dashboard`` to get a dashboard that provides both job and
  backend information.

Changed
-------

- JSON schema validation is no longer run by default on Qobj objects passed
  to :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.IBMQBackend.run`. This significantly speeds
  up the execution of the `run()` method. Qobj objects are still validated on the
  server side, and invalid Qobjs will continue to raise exceptions. To force local
  validation, set ``validate_qobj=True`` when you invoke ``run()``.

*************
Qiskit 0.15.0
*************

Terra 0.12.0
============

Prelude
-------

The 0.12.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The biggest
change for this release is the addition of support for parametric pulses to
OpenPulse. These are Pulse commands which take parameters rather than sample
points to describe a pulse. 0.12.0 is also the first release to include
support for Python 3.8. It also marks the beginning of the deprecation for
Python 3.5 support, which will be removed when the upstream community stops
supporting it.


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- The pass :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CSPLayout` was extended with two
  new parameters: ``call_limit`` and ``time_limit``. These options allow
  limiting how long the pass will run. The option ``call_limit`` limits the
  number of times that the recursive function in the backtracking solver may
  be called. Similarly, ``time_limit`` limits how long (in seconds) the solver
  will be allowed to run. The defaults are ``1000`` calls and ``10`` seconds
  respectively.

- :class:`qiskit.pulse.Acquire` can now be applied to a single qubit.
  This makes pulse programming more consistent and easier to reason
  about, as now all operations apply to a single channel.
  For example::

    acquire = Acquire(duration=10)
    schedule = Schedule()
    schedule.insert(60, acquire(AcquireChannel(0), MemorySlot(0), RegisterSlot(0)))
    schedule.insert(60, acquire(AcquireChannel(1), MemorySlot(1), RegisterSlot(1)))

- A new method :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.draw` was added to
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` to generate a graphviz image from
  the coupling map graph. For example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap

      coupling_map = CouplingMap(
          [[0, 1], [1, 0], [1, 2], [1, 3], [2, 1], [3, 1], [3, 4], [4, 3]])
      coupling_map.draw()

- Parametric pulses have been added to OpenPulse. These are pulse commands
  which are parameterized and understood by the backend. Arbitrary pulse
  shapes are still supported by the SamplePulse Command. The new supported
  pulse classes are:

    - :class:`qiskit.pulse.ConstantPulse`
    - :class:`qiskit.pulse.Drag`
    - :class:`qiskit.pulse.Gaussian`
    - :class:`qiskit.pulse.GaussianSquare`

  They can be used like any other Pulse command. An example::

      from qiskit.pulse import (Schedule, Gaussian, Drag, ConstantPulse,
                                GaussianSquare)

      sched = Schedule(name='parametric_demo')
      sched += Gaussian(duration=25, sigma=4, amp=0.5j)(DriveChannel(0))
      sched += Drag(duration=25, amp=0.1, sigma=5, beta=4)(DriveChannel(1))
      sched += ConstantPulse(duration=25, amp=0.3+0.1j)(DriveChannel(1))
      sched += GaussianSquare(duration=1500, amp=0.2, sigma=8,
                              width=140)(MeasureChannel(0)) << sched.duration

  The resulting schedule will be similar to a SamplePulse schedule built
  using :mod:`qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib`, however, waveform sampling will be
  performed by the backend. The method :meth:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule.draw`
  can still be used as usual. However, the command will be converted to a
  ``SamplePulse`` with the
  :meth:`qiskit.pulse.ParametricPulse.get_sample_pulse` method, so the
  pulse shown may not sample the continuous function the same way that the
  backend will.

  This feature can be used to construct Pulse programs for any backend, but
  the pulses will be converted to ``SamplePulse`` objects if the backend does
  not support parametric pulses. Backends which support them will have the
  following new attribute::

      backend.configuration().parametric_pulses: List[str]
      # e.g. ['gaussian', 'drag', 'constant']

  Note that the backend does not need to support all of the parametric
  pulses defined in Qiskit.

  When the backend supports parametric pulses, and the Pulse schedule is
  built with them, the assembled Qobj is significantly smaller. The size
  of a PulseQobj built entirely with parametric pulses is dependent only
  on the number of instructions, whereas the size of a PulseQobj built
  otherwise will grow with the duration of the instructions (since every
  sample must be specified with a value).

- Added utility functions, :func:`qiskit.scheduler.measure` and
  :func:`qiskit.scheduler.measure_all` to `qiskit.scheduler` module. These
  functions return a :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` object which measures
  qubits using OpenPulse. For example::

      from qiskit.scheduler import measure, measure_all

      measure_q0_schedule = measure(qubits=[0], backend=backend)
      measure_all_schedule = measure_all(backend)
      measure_custom_schedule = measure(qubits=[0],
                                        inst_map=backend.defaults().instruction_schedule_map,
                                        meas_map=[[0]],
                                        qubit_mem_slots={0: 1})

- Pulse :class:`qiskit.pulse.Schedule` objects now have better
  representations that for simple schedules should be valid Python
  expressions.

- The :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.measure_active`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.measure_all`, and
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.remove_final_measurements` now have
  an addition kwarg ``inplace``. When ``inplace`` is set to ``False`` the
  function will return a modified **copy** of the circuit. This is different
  from the default behavior which will modify the circuit object in-place and
  return nothing.

- Several new constructor methods were added to the
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap` class for building objects
  with basic qubit coupling graphs. The new constructor methods are:

    - :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_full`
    - :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_line`
    - :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_ring`
    - :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap.from_grid`

  For example, to use the new constructors to get a coupling map of 5
  qubits connected in a linear chain you can now run:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap

      coupling_map = CouplingMap.from_line(5)
      coupling_map.draw()

- Introduced a new pass
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.CrosstalkAdaptiveSchedule`. This
  pass aims to reduce the impact of crosstalk noise on a program. It
  uses crosstalk characterization data from the backend to schedule gates.
  When a pair of gates has high crosstalk, they get serialized using a
  barrier. Naive serialization is harmful because it incurs decoherence
  errors. Hence, this pass uses a SMT optimization approach to compute a
  schedule which minimizes the impact of crosstalk as well as decoherence
  errors.

  The pass takes as input a circuit which is already transpiled onto
  the backend i.e., the circuit is expressed in terms of physical qubits and
  swap gates have been inserted and decomposed into CNOTs if required. Using
  this circuit and crosstalk characterization data, a
  `Z3 optimization <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>`_ is used to construct a
  new scheduled circuit as output.

  To use the pass on a circuit circ::

    dag = circuit_to_dag(circ)
    pass_ = CrosstalkAdaptiveSchedule(backend_prop, crosstalk_prop)
    scheduled_dag = pass_.run(dag)
    scheduled_circ = dag_to_circuit(scheduled_dag)

  ``backend_prop`` is a :class:`qiskit.providers.models.BackendProperties`
  object for the target backend. ``crosstalk_prop`` is a dict which specifies
  conditional error rates. For two gates ``g1`` and ``g2``,
  ``crosstalk_prop[g1][g2]`` specifies the conditional error rate of ``g1``
  when ``g1`` and ``g2`` are executed simultaneously. A method for generating
  ``crosstalk_prop`` will be added in a future release of qiskit-ignis. Until
  then you'll either have to already know the crosstalk properties of your
  device, or manually write your own device characterization experiments.

- In the preset pass manager for optimization level 1,
  :func:`qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level_1_pass_manager` if
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.TrivialLayout` layout pass is not a
  perfect match for a particular circuit, then
  :class:`qiskit.transpiler.passes.DenseLayout` layout pass is used
  instead.

- Added a new abstract method
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot` to
  the abstract ``BaseOperator`` class, so it is included for all
  implementations of that abstract
  class, including :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` and
  ``QuantumChannel`` (e.g., :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Choi`)
  objects. This method returns the right operator multiplication
  ``a.dot(b)`` :math:`= a \cdot b`. This is equivalent to
  calling the operator
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.compose` method with the kwarg
  ``front`` set to ``True``.

- Added :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.average_gate_fidelity` and
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.gate_error` functions to the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module for working with
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` and ``QuantumChannel``
  (e.g., :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Choi`) objects.

- Added the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.partial_trace` function to the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` that works with
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` quantum state classes.
  For example::

      from qiskit.quantum_info.states import Statevector
      from qiskit.quantum_info.states import DensityMatrix
      from qiskit.quantum_info.states import partial_trace

      psi = Statevector.from_label('10+')
      partial_trace(psi, [0, 1])
      rho = DensityMatrix.from_label('10+')
      partial_trace(rho, [0, 1])

- When :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` or
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` is called with the
  ``with_layout`` kwarg set True (the default) the output visualization
  will now display the physical qubits as integers to clearly
  distinguish them from the virtual qubits.

  For Example:

  .. jupyter-execute::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit import transpile
      from qiskit.test.mock import FakeVigo

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      qc.h(0)
      qc.cx(0, 1)
      qc.cx(0, 2)
      transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, FakeVigo())
      transpiled_qc.draw(output='mpl')

- Added new state measure functions to the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info`
  module: :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.entropy`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.mutual_information`,
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.concurrence`, and
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.entanglement_of_formation`. These functions work
  with the :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector` and
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix` classes.

- The decomposition methods for single-qubit gates in
  :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis.one_qubit_decompose.OneQubitEulerDecomposer` have
  been expanded to now also include the ``'ZXZ'`` basis, characterized by three rotations
  about the  Z,X,Z axis. This now means that a general 2x2 Operator can be
  decomposed into following bases: ``U3``, ``U1X``, ``ZYZ``, ``ZXZ``,
  ``XYX``, ``ZXZ``.


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- Running functions that use :func:`qiskit.tools.parallel_map` (for example
  :func:`qiskit.execute.execute`, :func:`qiskit.compiler.transpile`, and
  :meth:`qiskit.transpiler.PassManager.run`) may not work when
  called from a script running outside of a ``if __name__ == '__main__':``
  block when using Python 3.8 on MacOS. Other environments are unaffected by
  this issue. This is due to changes in how parallel processes are launched
  by Python 3.8 on MacOS. If ``RuntimeError`` or ``AttributeError`` are
  raised by scripts that are directly calling ``parallel_map()`` or when
  calling a function that uses it internally with Python 3.8 on MacOS
  embedding the script calls inside ``if __name__ == '__main__':`` should
  workaround the issue. For example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QiskitError
      from qiskit import execute, BasicAer

      qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
      qc1.h(0)
      qc1.cx(0, 1)
      qc1.measure([0,1], [0,1])
      # making another circuit: superpositions
      qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
      qc2.h([0,1])
      qc2.measure([0,1], [0,1])
      execute([qc1, qc2], BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator'))

  should be changed to::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QiskitError
      from qiskit import execute, BasicAer

      def main():
          qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
          qc1.h(0)
          qc1.cx(0, 1)
          qc1.measure([0,1], [0,1])
          # making another circuit: superpositions
          qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
          qc2.h([0,1])
          qc2.measure([0,1], [0,1])
          execute([qc1, qc2], BasicAer.get_backend('qasm_simulator'))

      if __name__ == '__main__':
          main()

  if errors are encountered with Python 3.8 on MacOS.


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The value of the ``rep_time`` parameter for Pulse backend's configuration
  object is now in units of seconds, not microseconds. The first time a
  ``PulseBackendConfiguration`` object is initialized it will raise a single
  warning to the user to indicate this.

- The ``rep_time`` argument for :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble` now takes
  in a value in units of seconds, not microseconds. This was done to make
  the units with everything else in pulse. If you were passing in a value for
  ``rep_time`` ensure that you update the value to account for this change.

- The value of the ``base_gate`` property of
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate` objects has been changed from the
  class of the base gate to an instance of the class of the base gate.

- The ``base_gate_name`` property of :class:`qiskit.circuit.ControlledGate`
  has been removed; you can get the name of the base gate by accessing
  ``base_gate.name`` on the object. For example::

      from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
      from qiskit.extensions import HGate

      qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
      cch_gate = HGate().control(2)
      base_gate_name = cch_gate.base_gate.name

- Changed :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator` magic methods so that
  ``__mul__`` (which gets executed by python's multiplication operation,
  if the left hand side of the operation has it defined) implements right
  matrix multiplication (i.e. :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.dot`), and
  ``__rmul__`` (which gets executed by python's multiplication operation
  from the right hand side of the operation if the left does not have
  ``__mul__`` defined) implements scalar multiplication (i.e.
  :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Operator.multiply`). Previously both methods
  implemented scalar multiplciation.

- The second argument of the :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity`
  function, ``target``, is now optional. If a target unitary is not
  specified, then process fidelity of the input channel with the identity
  operator will be returned.

- :func:`qiskit.compiler.assemble` will now respect the configured
  ``max_shots`` value for a backend. If a value for the ``shots`` kwarg is
  specified that exceed the max shots set in the backend configuration the
  function will now raise a ``QiskitError`` exception. Additionally, if no
  shots argument is provided the default value is either 1024 (the previous
  behavior) or ``max_shots`` from the backend, whichever is lower.


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Methods for adding gates to a :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` with
  abbreviated keyword arguments (e.g. ``ctl``, ``tgt``) have had their keyword
  arguments renamed to be more descriptive (e.g. ``control_qubit``,
  ``target_qubit``). The old names have been deprecated. A table including the
  old and new calling signatures for the ``QuantumCircuit`` methods is included below.

  .. list-table:: New signatures for ``QuantumCircuit`` gate methods
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Instruction Type
       - Former Signature
       - New Signature
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.HGate`
       - ``qc.h(q)``
       - ``qc.h(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CHGate`
       - ``qc.ch(ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.ch((control_qubit, target_qubit))``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.IdGate`
       - ``qc.iden(q)``
       - ``qc.iden(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.RGate`
       - ``qc.iden(q)``
       - ``qc.iden(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.RGate`
       - ``qc.r(theta, phi, q)``
       - ``qc.r(theta, phi, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.RXGate`
       - ``qc.rx(theta, q)``
       - ``qc.rx(theta, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CrxGate`
       - ``qc.crx(theta, ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.crx(theta, control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.RYGate`
       - ``qc.ry(theta, q)``
       - ``qc.ry(theta, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CryGate`
       - ``qc.cry(theta, ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cry(theta, control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.RZGate`
       - ``qc.rz(phi, q)``
       - ``qc.rz(phi, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CrzGate`
       - ``qc.crz(theta, ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.crz(theta, control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.SGate`
       - ``qc.s(q)``
       - ``qc.s(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.SdgGate`
       - ``qc.sdg(q)``
       - ``qc.sdg(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.FredkinGate`
       - ``qc.cswap(ctl, tgt1, tgt2)``
       - ``qc.cswap(control_qubit, target_qubit1, target_qubit2)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.TGate`
       - ``qc.t(q)``
       - ``qc.t(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.TdgGate`
       - ``qc.tdg(q)``
       - ``qc.tdg(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.U1Gate`
       - ``qc.u1(theta, q)``
       - ``qc.u1(theta, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.Cu1Gate`
       - ``qc.cu1(theta, ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cu1(theta, control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.U2Gate`
       - ``qc.u2(phi, lam, q)``
       - ``qc.u2(phi, lam, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.U3Gate`
       - ``qc.u3(theta, phi, lam, q)``
       - ``qc.u3(theta, phi, lam, qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.Cu3Gate`
       - ``qc.cu3(theta, phi, lam, ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cu3(theta, phi, lam, control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.XGate`
       - ``qc.x(q)``
       - ``qc.x(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CnotGate`
       - ``qc.cx(ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cx(control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.ToffoliGate`
       - ``qc.ccx(ctl1, ctl2, tgt)``
       - ``qc.ccx(control_qubit1, control_qubit2, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.YGate`
       - ``qc.y(q)``
       - ``qc.y(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CyGate`
       - ``qc.cy(ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cy(control_qubit, target_qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.ZGate`
       - ``qc.z(q)``
       - ``qc.z(qubit)``
     * - :class:`qiskit.extensions.CzGate`
       - ``qc.cz(ctl, tgt)``
       - ``qc.cz(control_qubit, target_qubit)``

- Running :class:`qiskit.pulse.Acquire` on multiple qubits has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Additionally, the
  :class:`qiskit.pulse.AcquireInstruction` parameters ``mem_slots`` and
  ``reg_slots`` have been deprecated. Instead ``reg_slot`` and ``mem_slot``
  should be used instead.

- The attribute of the :class:`qiskit.providers.models.PulseDefaults` class
  ``circuit_instruction_map`` has been deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. Instead you should use the new attribute
  ``instruction_schedule_map``. This was done to match the type of the
  value of the attribute, which is an ``InstructionScheduleMap``.

- The :class:`qiskit.pulse.PersistentValue` command is deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. Similar functionality can be achieved with
  the :class:`qiskit.pulse.ConstantPulse` command (one of the new parametric
  pulses). Compare the following::

      from qiskit.pulse import Schedule, PersistentValue, ConstantPulse, \
                               DriveChannel

      # deprecated implementation
      sched_w_pv = Schedule()
      sched_w_pv += PersistentValue(value=0.5)(DriveChannel(0))
      sched_w_pv += PersistentValue(value=0)(DriveChannel(0)) << 10

      # preferred implementation
      sched_w_const = Schedule()
      sched_w_const += ConstantPulse(duration=10, amp=0.5)(DriveChannel(0))

- Python 3.5 support in qiskit-terra is deprecated. Support will be
  removed in the first release after the upstream Python community's end of
  life date for the version, which is 09/13/2020.

- The ``require_cptp`` kwarg of the
  :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.process_fidelity` function has been
  deprecated and will be removed in a future release. It is superseded by
  two separate kwargs ``require_cp`` and ``require_tp``.

- Setting the ``scale`` parameter for
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` as the first positional
  argument is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead you
  should use ``scale`` as keyword argument.

- The :mod:`qiskit.tools.qi.qi` module is deprecated and will be removed in a
  future release. The legacy functions in the module have all been superseded
  by functions and classes in the :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module. A table
  of the deprecated functions and their replacement are below:

  .. list-table:: ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi`` replacements
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Deprecated
       - Replacement
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.partial_trace`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.partial_trace`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.choi_to_pauli`
       - :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.Choi` and :class:`quantum_info.PTM`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.chop`
       - ``numpy.round``
     * - ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi.outer``
       - ``numpy.outer``
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.concurrence`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.concurrence`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.shannon_entropy`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.shannon_entropy`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.entropy`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.entropy`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.mutual_information`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.mutual_information`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.entanglement_of_formation`
       - :func:`qiskit.quantum_info.entanglement_of_formation`
     * - :func:`qiskit.tools.is_pos_def`
       - ``quantum_info.operators.predicates.is_positive_semidefinite_matrix``

- The :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info.states.states` module is deprecated and will
  be removed in a future release. The legacy functions in the module have
  all been superseded by functions and classes in the
  :mod:`qiskit.quantum_info` module.

  .. list-table:: ``qiskit.quantum_info.states.states`` replacements
     :header-rows: 1

     * - Deprecated
       - Replacement
     * - ``qiskit.quantum_info.states.states.basis_state``
       - :meth:`qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector.from_label`
     * - ``qiskit.quantum_info.states.states.projector``
       - :class:`qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix`

- The ``scaling`` parameter of the ``draw()`` method for the ``Schedule`` and
  ``Pulse`` objects was deprecated and will be removed in a future release.
  Instead the new ``scale`` parameter should be used. This was done to have
  a consistent argument between pulse and circuit drawings. For example::

      #The consistency in parameters is seen below
      #For circuits
      circuit = QuantumCircuit()
      circuit.draw(scale=0.2)
      #For pulses
      pulse = SamplePulse()
      pulse.draw(scale=0.2)
      #For schedules
      schedule = Schedule()
      schedule.draw(scale=0.2)


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Previously, calling :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.bind_parameters`
  prior to decomposing a circuit would result in the bound values not being
  correctly substituted into the decomposed gates. This has been resolved
  such that binding and decomposition may occur in any order. Fixes
  `issue #2482 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/2482>`_ and
  `issue #3509 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3509>`_

- The ``Collect2qBlocks`` pass had previously not considered classical
  conditions when determining whether to include a gate within an
  existing block. In some cases, this resulted in classical
  conditions being lost when transpiling with
  ``optimization_level=3``. This has been resolved so that classically
  conditioned gates are never included in a block.
  Fixes `issue #3215 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3215>`_

- All the output types for the circuit drawers in
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw` and
  :func:`qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer` have fixed and/or improved
  support for drawing controlled custom gates. Fixes
  `issue #3546 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3546>`_,
  `issue #3763 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3763>`_,
  and `issue #3764 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3764>`_

- Explanation and examples have been added to documentation for the
  :class:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit` methods for adding gates:
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ccx`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ch`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.crz`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cswap`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cu1`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cu3`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cx`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cy`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.cz`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.h`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.iden`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.rx`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.ry`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.rz`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.s`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.sdg`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.swap`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.t`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.tdg`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.u1`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.u2`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.u3`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.x`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.y`,
  :meth:`qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.z`. Fixes
  `issue #3400 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3400>`_

- Fixes for handling of complex number parameter in circuit visualization.
  Fixes `issue #3640 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/3640>`_


.. _Release Notes_0.12.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The transpiler passes in the :mod:`qiskit.transpiler.passes` directory have
  been organized into subdirectories to better categorize them by
  functionality. They are still all accessible under the
  ``qiskit.transpiler.passes`` namespace.

Aer 0.4.0
=========

Added
-----
 * Added ``NoiseModel.from_backend`` for building a basic device noise model for an IBMQ
   backend (\#569)
 * Added multi-GPU enabled simulation methods to the ``QasmSimulator``,
   ``StatevectorSimulator``, and ``UnitarySimulator``. The qasm simulator has gpu version
   of the density matrix and statevector methods and can be accessed using
   ``"method": "density_matrix_gpu"`` or ``"method": "statevector_gpu"`` in ``backend_options``.
   The statevector simulator gpu method can be accessed using ``"method": "statevector_gpu"``.
   The unitary simulator GPU method can be accessed using ``"method": "unitary_gpu"``. These
   backends use CUDA and require an NVidia GPU.(\#544)
 * Added ``PulseSimulator`` backend (\#542)
 * Added ``PulseSystemModel`` and ``HamiltonianModel`` classes to represent models to be used
   in ``PulseSimulator`` (\#496, \#493)
 * Added ``duffing_model_generators`` to generate ``PulseSystemModel`` objects from a list
   of parameters (\#516)
 * Migrated ODE function solver to C++ (\#442, \#350)
 * Added high level pulse simulator tests (\#379)
 * CMake BLAS_LIB_PATH flag to set path to look for BLAS lib (\#543)

Changed
-------

 * Changed the structure of the ``src`` directory to organise simulator source code.
   Simulator controller headers were moved to ``src/controllers`` and simulator method State
   headers are in ``src/simulators`` (\#544)
 * Moved the location of several functions (\#568):
   * Moved contents of ``qiskit.provider.aer.noise.errors`` into
   the ``qiskit.providers.noise`` module
   * Moved contents of ``qiskit.provider.aer.noise.utils`` into
   the ``qiskit.provider.aer.utils`` module.
 * Enabled optimization to aggregate consecutive gates in a circuit (fusion) by default (\#579).

Deprecated
----------
 * Deprecated ``utils.qobj_utils`` functions (\#568)
 * Deprecated ``qiskit.providers.aer.noise.device.basic_device_noise_model``. It is superseded
   by the ``NoiseModel.from_backend`` method (\#569)

Removed
-------
 * Removed ``NoiseModel.as_dict``, ``QuantumError.as_dict``, ``ReadoutError.as_dict``, and
   ``QuantumError.kron`` methods that were deprecated in 0.3 (\#568).

Ignis 0.2
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.6
========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.4.6
====================

Added
-----

- Several new methods were added to
  :class:`IBMQBackend<qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend>`:

    * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.wait_for_final_state`
      blocks until the job finishes. It takes a callback function that it will invoke
      after every query to provide feedback.
    * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend.active_jobs` returns
      the jobs submitted to a backend that are currently in an unfinished status.
    * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend.job_limit` returns the
      job limit for a backend.
    * :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend.remaining_jobs_count` returns the
      number of jobs that you can submit to the backend before job limit is reached.

- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.QueueInfo` now has a new
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.QueueInfo.format` method that returns a
  formatted string of the queue information.

- :class:`IBMQJob<qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob>` now has three new methods:
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.done`,
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.running`, and
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.job.IBMQJob.cancelled` that are used to indicate job status.

- :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend.run()` now accepts an optional `job_tags`
  parameter. If specified, the `job_tags` are assigned to the job, which can later be used
  as a filter in :meth:`qiskit.providers.ibmq.ibmqbackend.IBMQBackend.jobs()`.

- :class:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager` now has a new method
  :meth:`~qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed.IBMQJobManager.retrieve_job_set()` that allows
  you to retrieve a previously submitted job set using the job set ID.

Changed
-------

- The ``Exception`` hierarchy has been refined with more specialized classes.
  You can, however, continue to catch their parent exceptions (such
  as ``IBMQAccountError``). Also, the exception class ``IBMQApiUrlError``
  has been replaced by ``IBMQAccountCredentialsInvalidUrl`` and
  ``IBMQAccountCredentialsInvalidToken``.

Deprecated
----------

- The use of proxy urls without a protocol (e.g. ``http://``) is deprecated
  due to recent Python changes.

*************
Qiskit 0.14.0
*************

Terra 0.11.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.11.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The biggest
change for this release is the addition of the pulse scheduler. This allows
users to define their quantum program as a ``QuantumCircuit`` and then map it
to the underlying pulse instructions that will control the quantum hardware to
implement the circuit.

.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Added 5 new commands to easily retrieve user-specific data from
  ``BackendProperties``: ``gate_property``, ``gate_error``, ``gate_length``,
  ``qubit_property``, ``t1``, ``t2``, ``readout_error`` and ``frequency``.
  They return the specific values of backend properties. For example::

    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeOurense
    backend = FakeOurense()
    properties = backend.properties()

    gate_property = properties.gate_property('u1')
    gate_error = properties.gate_error('u1', 0)
    gate_length = properties.gate_length('u1', 0)
    qubit_0_property = properties.qubit_property(0)
    t1_time_0 = properties.t1(0)
    t2_time_0 = properties.t2(0)
    readout_error_0 = properties.readout_error(0)
    frequency_0 = properties.frequency(0)

- Added method ``Instruction.is_parameterized()`` to check if an instruction
  object is parameterized. This method returns ``True`` if and only if
  instruction has a ``ParameterExpression`` or ``Parameter`` object for one
  of its params.

- Added a new analysis pass ``Layout2qDistance``. This pass allows to "score"
  a layout selection, once ``property_set['layout']`` is set.  The score will
  be the sum of distances for each two-qubit gate in the circuit, when they
  are not directly connected. This scoring does not consider direction in the
  coupling map. The lower the number, the better the layout selection is.

  For example, consider a linear coupling map ``[0]--[2]--[1]`` and the
  following circuit::

      qr = QuantumRegister(2, 'qr')
      circuit = QuantumCircuit(qr)
      circuit.cx(qr[0], qr[1])

  If the layout is ``{qr[0]:0, qr[1]:1}``, ``Layout2qDistance`` will set
  ``property_set['layout_score'] = 1``. If the layout
  is ``{qr[0]:0, qr[1]:2}``, then the result
  is ``property_set['layout_score'] = 0``. The lower the score, the better.

- Added ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.cnot`` as an alias for the ``cx`` method of
  ``QuantumCircuit``. The names ``cnot`` and ``cx`` are often used
  interchangeably now the `cx` method can be called with either name.

- Added ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.toffoli`` as an alias for the ``ccx`` method
  of ``QuantumCircuit``. The names ``toffoli`` and ``ccx`` are often used
  interchangeably now the `ccx` method can be called with either name.

- Added ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.fredkin`` as an alias for the ``cswap``
  method of ``QuantumCircuit``. The names ``fredkin`` and ``cswap`` are
  often used interchangeably now the `cswap` method can be called with
  either name.

- The ``latex`` output mode for ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` and
  the ``qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.draw()`` method now has a mode to
  passthrough raw latex from gate labels and parameters. The syntax
  for doing this mirrors matplotlib's
  `mathtext mode <https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/text/mathtext.html>`__
  syntax. Any portion of a label string between a pair of '$' characters will
  be treated as raw latex and passed directly into the generated output latex.
  This can be leveraged to add more advanced formatting to circuit diagrams
  generated with the latex drawer.

  Prior to this release all gate labels were run through a utf8 -> latex
  conversion to make sure that the output latex would compile the string as
  expected. This is still what happens for all portions of a label outside
  the '$' pair. Also if you want to use a dollar sign in your label make sure
  you escape it in the label string (ie ``'\$'``).

  You can mix and match this passthrough with the utf8 -> latex conversion to
  create the exact label you want, for example::

      from qiskit import circuit
      circ = circuit.QuantumCircuit(2)
      circ.h([0, 1])
      circ.append(circuit.Gate(name='_gate', num_qubits=1, params=[0]), [0])
      circ.append(circuit.Gate(name='_gate$_2$', num_qubits=1, params=[0]), [1])
      circ.append(circuit.Gate(name='\$\$_gate', num_qubits=1, params=[0]), [1])
      circ.draw(output='latex')

  will now render the first custom gate's label as ``_gate``, the second
  will be ``_gate`` with a 2 subscript, and the last custom gate's label
  will be ``$$_gate``.

- Add ``ControlledGate`` class for representing controlled
  gates. Controlled gate instances are created with the
  ``control(n)`` method of ``Gate`` objects where ``n`` represents
  the number of controls. The control qubits come before the
  controlled qubits in the new gate. For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
    from qiskit.extensions import HGate
    hgate = HGate()
    circ = QuantumCircuit(4)
    circ.append(hgate.control(3), [0, 1, 2, 3])
    print(circ)

  generates::

    q_0: |0>
              
    q_1: |0>
              
    q_2: |0>
            
    q_3: |0> H 
            

- Allowed values of ``meas_level`` parameters and fields can now be a member
  from the `IntEnum` class ``qiskit.qobj.utils.MeasLevel``. This can be used
  when calling ``execute`` (or anywhere else ``meas_level`` is specified) with
  a pulse experiment. For example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile, schedule, execute
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeOpenPulse2Q
    from qiskit.qobj.utils import MeasLevel, MeasReturnType

    backend = FakeOpenPulse2Q()
    qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    qc_transpiled = transpile(qc, backend)
    sched = schedule(qc_transpiled, backend)
    execute(sched, backend, meas_level=MeasLevel.CLASSIFIED)

  In this above example, ``meas_level=MeasLevel.CLASSIFIED`` and
  ``meas_level=2`` can be used interchangably now.

- A new layout selector based on constraint solving is included. `CSPLayout` models the problem
  of finding a layout as a constraint problem and uses recursive backtracking to solve it.

  .. code-block:: python

     cmap16 = CouplingMap(FakeRueschlikon().configuration().coupling_map)

     qr = QuantumRegister(5, 'q')
     circuit = QuantumCircuit(qr)
     circuit.cx(qr[0], qr[1])
     circuit.cx(qr[0], qr[2])
     circuit.cx(qr[0], qr[3])

     pm = PassManager(CSPLayout(cmap16))
     circuit_after = pm.run(circuit)
     print(pm.property_set['layout'])


  .. code-block:: python

      Layout({
      1: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 1),
      2: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 0),
      3: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 3),
      4: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 4),
      15: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 2)
      })


  The parameter ``CSPLayout(...,strict_direction=True)`` is more restrictive
  but it will guarantee there is no need of running ``CXDirection`` after.

  .. code-block:: python

      pm = PassManager(CSPLayout(cmap16, strict_direction=True))
      circuit_after = pm.run(circuit)
      print(pm.property_set['layout'])

  .. code-block:: python

      Layout({
      8: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 4),
      11: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 3),
      5: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 1),
      6: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 0),
      7: Qubit(QuantumRegister(5, 'q'), 2)
      })

  If the constraint system is not solvable, the `layout` property is not set.

  .. code-block:: python

      circuit.cx(qr[0], qr[4])
      pm = PassManager(CSPLayout(cmap16))
      circuit_after = pm.run(circuit)
      print(pm.property_set['layout'])

  .. code-block:: python

      None

- PulseBackendConfiguration (accessed normally as backend.configuration())
  has been extended with useful methods to explore its data and the
  functionality that exists in PulseChannelSpec. PulseChannelSpec will be
  deprecated in the future. For example::

      backend = provider.get_backend(backend_name)
      config = backend.configuration()
      q0_drive = config.drive(0)  # or, DriveChannel(0)
      q0_meas = config.measure(0)  # MeasureChannel(0)
      q0_acquire = config.acquire(0)  # AcquireChannel(0)
      config.hamiltonian  # Returns a dictionary with hamiltonian info
      config.sample_rate()  # New method which returns 1 / dt

- ``PulseDefaults`` (accessed normally as ``backend.defaults()``) has an
  attribute, ``circuit_instruction_map`` which has the methods of CmdDef.
  The new `circuit_instruction_map` is an ``InstructionScheduleMap`` object
  with three new functions beyond what CmdDef had:

   * qubit_instructions(qubits) returns the operations defined for the qubits
   * assert_has(instruction, qubits) raises an error if the op isn't defined
   * remove(instruction, qubits) like pop, but doesn't require parameters

  There are some differences from the CmdDef:

   * ``__init__`` takes no arguments
   * ``cmds`` and ``cmd_qubits`` are deprecated and replaced with
     ``instructions`` and ``qubits_with_instruction``

  Example::

      backend = provider.get_backend(backend_name)
      inst_map = backend.defaults().circuit_instruction_map
      qubit = inst_map.qubits_with_instruction('u3')[0]
      x_gate = inst_map.get('u3', qubit, P0=np.pi, P1=0, P2=np.pi)
      pulse_schedule = x_gate(DriveChannel(qubit))

- A new kwarg parameter, ``show_framechange_channels`` to optionally disable
  displaying channels with only framechange instructions in pulse
  visualizations was added to the ``qiskit.visualization.pulse_drawer()``
  function and ``qiskit.pulse.Schedule.draw()`` method. When this new kwarg
  is set to ``False`` the output pulse schedule visualization will not
  include any channels that only include frame changes.

  For example::

      from qiskit.pulse import *
      from qiskit.pulse import library as pulse_lib

      gp0 = pulse_lib.gaussian(duration=20, amp=1.0, sigma=1.0)
      sched = Schedule()
      channel_a = DriveChannel(0)
      channel_b = DriveChannel(1)
      sched += Play(gp0, channel_a)
      sched = sched.insert(60, ShiftPhase(-1.57, channel_a))
      sched = sched.insert(30, ShiftPhase(-1.50, channel_b))
      sched = sched.insert(70, ShiftPhase(1.50, channel_b))

      sched.draw(show_framechange_channels=False)

- A new utility function ``qiskit.result.marginal_counts()`` is added
  which allows marginalization of the counts over some indices of interest.
  This is useful when more qubits are measured than needed, and one wishes
  to get the observation counts for some subset of them only.

- When ``passmanager.run(...)`` is invoked with more than one circuit, the
  transpilation of these circuits will run in parallel.

- PassManagers can now be sliced to create a new PassManager containing a
  subset of passes using the square bracket operator. This allow running or
  drawing a portion of the PassManager for easier testing and visualization.
  For example let's try to draw the first 3 passes of a PassManager pm, or
  run just the second pass on our circuit:

  .. code-block:: python

    pm[0:4].draw()
    circuit2 = pm[1].run(circuit)

  Also now, PassManagers can be created by adding two PassManagers or by
  directly adding a pass/list of passes to a PassManager.

  .. code-block:: python

    pm = pm1[0] + pm2[1:3]
    pm += [setLayout, unroller]

- A basic ``scheduler`` module has now been added to Qiskit. The `scheduler`
  schedules an input transpiled ``QuantumCircuit`` into a pulse
  ``Schedule``. The scheduler accepts as input a ``Schedule`` and either a
  pulse ``Backend``, or a ``CmdDef`` which relates circuit ``Instruction``
  objects on specific qubits to pulse Schedules and a ``meas_map`` which
  determines which measurements must occur together.

  Scheduling example::

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile, schedule
    from qiskit.test.mock import FakeOpenPulse2Q

    backend = FakeOpenPulse2Q()
    qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
    qc.h(0)
    qc.cx(0,1)
    qc_transpiled = transpile(qc, backend)
    schedule(qc_transpiled, backend)

  The scheduler currently supports two scheduling policies,
  `as_late_as_possible` (``alap``) and `as_soon_as_possible` (``asap``), which
  respectively schedule pulse instructions to occur as late as
  possible or as soon as possible across qubits in a circuit.
  The scheduling policy may be selected with the input argument ``method``,
  for example::

    schedule(qc_transpiled, backend, method='alap')

  It is easy to use a pulse ``Schedule`` within a ``QuantumCircuit`` by
  mapping it to a custom circuit instruction such as a gate which may be used
  in a ``QuantumCircuit``. To do this, first, define the custom gate and then
  add an entry into the ``CmdDef`` for the gate, for each qubit that the gate
  will be applied to. The gate can then be used in the ``QuantumCircuit``.
  At scheduling time the gate will be mapped to the underlying pulse schedule.
  Using this technique allows easy integration with preexisting qiskit modules
  such as Ignis.

  For example::

      from qiskit import pulse, circuit, schedule
      from qiskit.pulse import pulse_lib

      custom_cmd_def = pulse.CmdDef()

      # create custom gate
      custom_gate = circuit.Gate(name='custom_gate', num_qubits=1, params=[])

      # define schedule for custom gate
      custom_schedule = pulse.Schedule()
      custom_schedule += pulse_lib.gaussian(20, 1.0, 10)(pulse.DriveChannel)

      # add schedule to custom gate with same name
      custom_cmd_def.add('custom_gate', (0,), custom_schedule)

      # use custom gate in a circuit
      custom_qc = circuit.QuantumCircuit(1)
      custom_qc.append(custom_gate, qargs=[0])

      # schedule the custom gate
      schedule(custom_qc, cmd_def=custom_cmd_def, meas_map=[[0]])


.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Known Issues:

Known Issues
------------

- The feature for transpiling in parallel when ``passmanager.run(...)`` is
  invoked with more than one circuit is not supported under Windows. See
  `#2988 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/2988>`__ for more
  details.


.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The ``qiskit.pulse.channels.SystemTopology`` class was used as a helper
  class for ``PulseChannelSpec``. It has been removed since with the deprecation
  of ``PulseChannelSpec`` and changes to ``BackendConfiguration`` make it
  unnecessary.

- The previously deprecated representation of qubits and classical bits as
  tuple, which was deprecated in the 0.9 release, has been removed. The use
  of ``Qubit`` and ``Clbit`` objects is the new way to represent qubits and
  classical bits.

- The previously deprecated representation of the basis set as single string
  has been removed. A list of strings is the new preferred way.

- The method ``BaseModel.as_dict``, which was deprecated in the 0.9 release,
  has been removed in favor of the method ``BaseModel.to_dict``.

- In PulseDefaults (accessed normally as backend.defaults()),
  ``qubit_freq_est`` and ``meas_freq_est`` are now returned in Hz rather than
  GHz. This means the new return values are 1e9 * their previous value.

- `dill <https://pypi.org/project/dill/>`__ was added as a requirement. This
  is needed to enable running ``passmanager.run()`` in parallel for more than
  one circuit.

- The previously deprecated gate ``UBase``, which was deprecated
  in the 0.9 release, has been removed. The gate ``U3Gate``
  should be used instead.

- The previously deprecated gate ``CXBase``, which was deprecated
  in the 0.9 release, has been removed. The gate ``CnotGate``
  should be used instead.

- The instruction ``snapshot`` used to implicitly convert the ``label``
  parameter to string. That conversion has been removed and an error is raised
  if a string is not provided.

- The previously deprecated gate ``U0Gate``, which was deprecated
  in the 0.9 release, has been removed. The gate ``IdGate``
  should be used instead to insert delays.


.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The ``qiskit.pulse.CmdDef`` class has been deprecated. Instead you should
  use the ``qiskit.pulse.InstructionScheduleMap``. The
  ``InstructionScheduleMap`` object for a pulse enabled system can be
  accessed at ``backend.defaults().instruction_schedules``.

- ``PulseChannelSpec`` is being deprecated. Use ``BackendConfiguration``
  instead. The backend configuration is accessed normally as
  ``backend.configuration()``. The config has been extended with most of
  the functionality of PulseChannelSpec, with some modifications as follows,
  where `0` is an exemplary qubit index::

      pulse_spec.drives[0]   -> config.drive(0)
      pulse_spec.measures[0] -> config.measure(0)
      pulse_spec.acquires[0] -> config.acquire(0)
      pulse_spec.controls[0] -> config.control(0)

  Now, if there is an attempt to get a channel for a qubit which does not
  exist for the device, a ``BackendConfigurationError`` will be raised with
  a helpful explanation.

  The methods ``memoryslots`` and ``registerslots`` of the PulseChannelSpec
  have not been migrated to the backend configuration. These classical
  resources are not restrained by the physical configuration of a backend
  system. Please instantiate them directly::

      pulse_spec.memoryslots[0] -> MemorySlot(0)
      pulse_spec.registerslots[0] -> RegisterSlot(0)

  The ``qubits`` method is not migrated to backend configuration. The result
  of ``qubits`` can be built as such::

      [q for q in range(backend.configuration().n_qubits)]

- ``Qubit`` within ``pulse.channels`` has been deprecated. They should not
  be used. It is possible to obtain channel <=> qubit mappings through the
  BackendConfiguration (or backend.configuration()).

- The function ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer.qx_color_scheme()`` has
  been deprecated. This function is no longer used internally and doesn't
  reflect the current IBM QX style. If you were using this function to
  generate a style dict locally you must save the output from it and use
  that dictionary directly.

- The Exception ``TranspilerAccessError`` has been deprecated. An
  alternative function ``TranspilerError`` can be used instead to provide
  the same functionality. This alternative function provides the exact same
  functionality but with greater generality.

- Buffers in Pulse are deprecated. If a nonzero buffer is supplied, a warning
  will be issued with a reminder to use a Delay instead. Other options would
  include adding samples to a pulse instruction which are (0.+0.j) or setting
  the start time of the next pulse to ``schedule.duration + buffer``.

- Passing in ``sympy.Basic``, ``sympy.Expr`` and ``sympy.Matrix`` types as
  instruction parameters are deprecated and will be removed in a future
  release. You'll need to convert the input to one of the supported types
  which are:

   * ``int``
   * ``float``
   * ``complex``
   * ``str``
   * ``np.ndarray``


.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The Collect2qBlocks and CommutationAnalysis passes in the transpiler had been
  unable to process circuits containing Parameterized gates, preventing
  Parameterized circuits from being transpiled at optimization_level 2 or
  above. These passes have been corrected to treat Parameterized gates as
  opaque.

- The align_measures function had an issue where Measure stimulus
  pulses weren't properly aligned with Acquire pulses, resulting in
  an error. This has been fixed.

- Uses of ``numpy.random.seed`` have been removed so that calls of qiskit
  functions do not affect results of future calls to ``numpy.random``

- Fixed race condition occurring in the job monitor when
  ``job.queue_position()`` returns ``None``. ``None`` is a valid
  return from ``job.queue_position()``.

- Backend support for ``memory=True`` now checked when that kwarg is passed.
  ``QiskitError`` results if not supported.

- When transpiling without a coupling map, there were no check in the amount
  of qubits of the circuit to transpile. Now the transpile process checks
  that the backend has enough qubits to allocate the circuit.


.. _Release Notes_0.11.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The ``qiskit.result.marginal_counts()`` function replaces a similar utility
  function in qiskit-ignis
  ``qiskit.ignis.verification.tomography.marginal_counts()``, which
  will be deprecated in a future qiskit-ignis release.

- All sympy parameter output type support have been been removed (or
  deprecated as noted) from qiskit-terra. This includes sympy type
  parameters in ``QuantumCircuit`` objects, qasm ast nodes, or ``Qobj``
  objects.

Aer 0.3
=======

No Change

Ignis 0.2
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.6
========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.4
==================

Prelude
-------

The 0.4.0 release is the first release that makes use of all the features
of the new IBM Q API. In particular, the ``IBMQJob`` class has been revamped in
order to be able to retrieve more information from IBM Q, and a Job Manager
class has been added for allowing a higher-level and more seamless usage of
large or complex jobs. If you have not upgraded from the legacy IBM Q
Experience or QConsole yet, please ensure to revisit the release notes for
IBM Q Provider 0.3 (Qiskit 0.11) for more details on how to make the
transition. The legacy accounts will no longer be supported as of this release.


New Features
------------

Job modifications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``IBMQJob`` class has been revised, and now mimics more closely to the
contents of a remote job along with new features:

* You can now assign a name to a job, by specifying
  ``IBMQBackend.run(..., job_name='...')`` when submitting a job. This name
  can be retrieved via ``IBMQJob.name()`` and can be used for filtering.
* Jobs can now be shared with other users at different levels (global, per
  hub, group or project) via an optional ``job_share_level`` parameter when
  submitting the job.
* ``IBMQJob`` instances now have more attributes, reflecting the contents of the
  remote IBM Q jobs. This implies that new attributes introduced by the IBM Q
  API will automatically and immediately be available for use (for example,
  ``job.new_api_attribute``). The new attributes will be promoted to methods
  when they are considered stable (for example, ``job.name()``).
* ``.error_message()`` returns more information on why a job failed.
* ``.queue_position()`` accepts a ``refresh`` parameter for forcing an update.
* ``.result()`` accepts an optional ``partial`` parameter, for returning
  partial results, if any, of jobs that failed. Be aware that ``Result``
  methods, such as ``get_counts()`` will raise an exception if applied on
  experiments that failed.

Please note that the changes include some low-level modifications of the class.
If you were creating the instances manually, note that:

* the signature of the constructor has changed to account for the new features.
* the ``.submit()`` method can no longer be called directly, and jobs are
  expected to be submitted either via the synchronous ``IBMQBackend.run()`` or
  via the Job Manager.

Job Manager
^^^^^^^^^^^

A new Job Manager (``IBMQJobManager``) has been introduced, as a higher-level
mechanism for handling jobs composed of multiple circuits or pulse schedules.
The Job Manager aims to provide a transparent interface, intelligently splitting
the input into efficient units of work and taking full advantage of the
different components. It will be expanded on upcoming versions, and become the
recommended entry point for job submission.

Its ``.run()`` method receives a list of circuits or pulse schedules, and
returns a ``ManagedJobSet instance``, which can then be used to track the
statuses and results of these jobs. For example::

    from qiskit.providers.ibmq.managed import IBMQJobManager
    from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
    from qiskit import IBMQ
    from qiskit.compiler import transpile

    provider = IBMQ.load_account()
    backend = provider.backends.ibmq_ourense

    circs = []
    for _ in range(1000000):
        circs.append(random_circuit(2, 2))
    transpile(circs, backend=backend)

    # Farm out the jobs.
    jm = IBMQJobManager()
    job_set = jm.run(circs, backend=backend, name='foo')

    job_set.statuses()    # Gives a list of job statuses
    job_set.report()    # Prints detailed job information
    results = job_set.results()
    counts = results.get_counts(5)   # Returns data for experiment 5


provider.backends modifications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``provider.backends`` member, which was previously a function that returned
a list of backends, has been promoted to a service. This implies that it can
be used both in the previous way, as a ``.backends()`` method, and also as a
``.backends`` attribute with expanded capabilities:

* it contains the existing backends from that provider as attributes, which
  can be used for autocompletion. For example::

      my_backend = provider.get_backend('ibmq_qasm_simulator')

  is equivalent to::

      my_backend = provider.backends.ibmq_qasm_simulator

* the ``provider.backends.jobs()`` and ``provider.backends.retrieve_job()``
  methods can be used for retrieving provider-wide jobs.


Other changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* The ``backend.properties()`` function now accepts an optional ``datetime``
  parameter. If specified, the function returns the backend properties
  closest to, but older than, the specified datetime filter.
* Some ``warnings`` have been toned down to ``logger.warning`` messages.


*************
Qiskit 0.13.0
*************

Terra 0.10.0
============

.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.10.0 release includes several new features and bug fixes. The biggest
change for this release is the addition of initial support for using Qiskit
with trapped ion trap backends.


.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- Introduced new methods in ``QuantumCircuit`` which allows the seamless adding or removing
  of measurements at the end of a circuit.

  ``measure_all()``
    Adds a ``barrier`` followed by a ``measure`` operation to all qubits in the circuit.
    Creates a ``ClassicalRegister`` of size equal to the number of qubits in the circuit,
    which store the measurements.

  ``measure_active()``
    Adds a ``barrier`` followed by a ``measure`` operation to all active qubits in the circuit.
    A qubit is active if it has at least one other operation acting upon it.
    Creates a ``ClassicalRegister`` of size equal to the number of active qubits in the circuit,
    which store the measurements.

  ``remove_final_measurements()``
    Removes all final measurements and preceeding ``barrier`` from a circuit.
    A measurement is considered "final" if it is not followed by any other operation,
    excluding barriers and other measurements.
    After the measurements are removed, if all of the classical bits in the ``ClassicalRegister``
    are idle (have no operations attached to them), then the ``ClassicalRegister`` is removed.

  Examples::

        # Using measure_all()
        circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
        circuit.h(0)
        circuit.measure_all()
        circuit.draw()

        # A ClassicalRegister with prefix measure was created.
        # It has 2 clbits because there are 2 qubits to measure

                       
             q_0: |0> H M
                       
             q_1: |0>M
                              
        measure_0: 0 
                                 
        measure_1: 0 


        # Using measure_active()
        circuit = QuantumCircuit(2)
        circuit.h(0)
        circuit.measure_active()
        circuit.draw()

        # This ClassicalRegister only has 1 clbit because only 1 qubit is active

                       
             q_0: |0> H M
                       
             q_1: |0>
                             
        measure_0: 0 


        # Using remove_final_measurements()
        # Assuming circuit_all and circuit_active are the circuits from the measure_all and
        # measure_active examples above respectively

        circuit_all.remove_final_measurements()
        circuit_all.draw()
        # The ClassicalRegister is removed because, after the measurements were removed,
        # all of its clbits were idle

                
        q_0: |0> H 
                
        q_1: |0>


        circuit_active.remove_final_measurements()
        circuit_active.draw()
        # This will result in the same circuit

                
        q_0: |0> H 
                
        q_1: |0>

- Initial support for executing experiments on ion trap backends has been
  added.

- An Rxx gate (rxx) and a global MlmerSrensen gate (ms) have been added
  to the standard gate set.

- A Cnot to Rxx/Rx/Ry decomposer ``cnot_rxx_decompose`` and a single qubit
  Euler angle decomposer ``OneQubitEulerDecomposer`` have been added to the
  ``quantum_info.synthesis`` module.

- A transpiler pass ``MSBasisDecomposer`` has been added to unroll circuits
  defined over U3 and Cnot gates into a circuit defined over Rxx,Ry and Rx.
  This pass will be included in preset pass managers for backends which
  include the 'rxx' gate in their supported basis gates.

- The backends in ``qiskit.test.mock`` now contain a snapshot of real
  device calibration data. This is accessible via the ``properties()`` method
  for each backend. This can be used to test any code that depends on
  backend properties, such as noise-adaptive transpiler passes or device
  noise models for simulation. This will create a faster testing and
  development cycle without the need to go to live backends.

- Allows the Result class to return partial results. If a valid result schema
  is loaded that contains some experiments which succeeded and some which
  failed, this allows accessing the data from experiments that succeeded,
  while raising an exception for experiments that failed and displaying the
  appropriate error message for the failed results.

- An ``ax`` kwarg has been added to the following visualization functions:

   * ``qiskit.visualization.plot_histogram``
   * ``qiskit.visualization.plot_state_paulivec``
   * ``qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere``
   * ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer`` (``mpl`` backend only)
   * ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.draw`` (``mpl`` backend only)

  This kwarg is used to pass in a ``matplotlib.axes.Axes`` object to the
  visualization functions. This enables integrating these visualization
  functions into a larger visualization workflow. Also, if an `ax` kwarg is
  specified then there is no return from the visualization functions.

- An ``ax_real`` and ``ax_imag`` kwarg has been added to the
  following visualization functions:

   * ``qiskit.visualization.plot_state_hinton``
   * ``qiskit.visualization.plot_state_city``

  These new kargs work the same as the newly added ``ax`` kwargs for other
  visualization functions. However because these plots use two axes (one for
  the real component, the other for the imaginary component). Having two
  kwargs also provides the flexibility to only generate a visualization for
  one of the components instead of always doing both. For example::

      from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
      from qiskit.visualization import plot_state_hinton

      ax = plt.gca()

      plot_state_hinton(psi, ax_real=ax)

  will only generate a plot of the real component.

- A given pass manager now can be edited with the new method `replace`. This method allows to
  replace a particular stage in a pass manager, which can be handy when dealing with preset
  pass managers. For example, let's edit the layout selector of the pass manager used at
  optimization level 0:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.level0 import level_0_pass_manager
    from qiskit.transpiler.transpile_config import TranspileConfig

    pass_manager = level_0_pass_manager(TranspileConfig(coupling_map=CouplingMap([[0,1]])))

    pass_manager.draw()

  .. code-block::

    [0] FlowLinear: SetLayout
    [1] Conditional: TrivialLayout
    [2] FlowLinear: FullAncillaAllocation, EnlargeWithAncilla, ApplyLayout
    [3] FlowLinear: Unroller

  The layout selection is set in the stage `[1]`. Let's replace it with `DenseLayout`:

  .. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.transpiler.passes import DenseLayout

    pass_manager.replace(1, DenseLayout(coupling_map), condition=lambda property_set: not property_set['layout'])
    pass_manager.draw()

  .. code-block::

    [0] FlowLinear: SetLayout
    [1] Conditional: DenseLayout
    [2] FlowLinear: FullAncillaAllocation, EnlargeWithAncilla, ApplyLayout
    [3] FlowLinear: Unroller

  If you want to replace it without any condition, you can use set-item shortcut:

  .. code-block:: python

    pass_manager[1] = DenseLayout(coupling_map)
    pass_manager.draw()

  .. code-block::

    [0] FlowLinear: SetLayout
    [1] FlowLinear: DenseLayout
    [2] FlowLinear: FullAncillaAllocation, EnlargeWithAncilla, ApplyLayout
    [3] FlowLinear: Unroller

- Introduced a new pulse command ``Delay`` which may be inserted into a pulse
  ``Schedule``. This command accepts a ``duration`` and may be added to any
  ``Channel``. Other commands may not be scheduled on a channel during a delay.

  The delay can be added just like any other pulse command. For example::

    from qiskit import pulse
    from qiskit.pulse.utils import pad

    dc0 = pulse.DriveChannel(0)

    delay = pulse.Delay(1)
    test_pulse = pulse.SamplePulse([1.0])

    sched = pulse.Schedule()
    sched += test_pulse(dc0).shift(1)

    # build padded schedule by hand
    ref_sched = delay(dc0) | sched

    # pad schedule
    padded_sched = pad(sched)

    assert padded_sched == ref_sched

  One may also pass additional channels to be padded and a time to pad until,
  for example::

    from qiskit import pulse
    from qiskit.pulse.utils import pad

    dc0 = pulse.DriveChannel(0)
    dc1 = pulse.DriveChannel(1)

    delay = pulse.Delay(1)
    test_pulse = pulse.SamplePulse([1.0])

    sched = pulse.Schedule()
    sched += test_pulse(dc0).shift(1)

    # build padded schedule by hand
    ref_sched = delay(dc0) | delay(dc1) |  sched

    # pad schedule across both channels until up until the first time step
    padded_sched = pad(sched, channels=[dc0, dc1], until=1)

    assert padded_sched == ref_sched


.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- Assignments and modifications to the ``data`` attribute of
  ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit`` objects are now validated following the same
  rules used throughout the ``QuantumCircuit`` API. This was done to
  improve the performance of the circuits API since we can now assume the
  ``data`` attribute is in a known format. If you were manually modifying
  the ``data`` attribute of a circuit object before this may no longer work
  if your modifications resulted in a data structure other than the list
  of instructions with context in the format ``[(instruction, qargs, cargs)]``

- The transpiler default passmanager for optimization level 2 now uses the
  ``DenseLayout`` layout selection mechanism by default instead of
  ``NoiseAdaptiveLayout``. The ``Denselayout`` pass has also been modified
  to be made noise-aware.

- The deprecated ``DeviceSpecification`` class has been removed. Instead you should
  use the ``PulseChannelSpec``. For example, you can run something like::

      device = pulse.PulseChannelSpec.from_backend(backend)
      device.drives[0]    # for DeviceSpecification, this was device.q[0].drive
      device.memoryslots  # this was device.mem

- The deprecated module ``qiskit.pulse.ops`` has been removed. Use
  ``Schedule`` and ``Instruction`` methods directly. For example, rather
  than::

      ops.union(schedule_0, schedule_1)
      ops.union(instruction, schedule)  # etc

  Instead please use::

      schedule_0.union(schedule_1)
      instruction.union(schedule)

  This same pattern applies to other ``ops`` functions: ``insert``, ``shift``,
  ``append``, and ``flatten``.


.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- Using the ``control`` property of ``qiskit.circuit.Instruction`` for
  classical control is now deprecated. In the future this property will be
  used for quantum control. Classically conditioned operations will instead
  be handled by the ``condition`` property of ``qiskit.circuit.Instruction``.

- Support for setting ``qiskit.circuit.Instruction`` parameters with an object
  of type ``qiskit.qasm.node.Node`` has been deprecated. ``Node`` objects that
  were previously used as parameters should be converted to a supported type
  prior to initializing a new ``Instruction`` object or calling the
  ``Instruction.params`` setter. Supported types are ``int``, ``float``,
  ``complex``, ``str``, ``qiskit.circuit.ParameterExpression``, or
  ``numpy.ndarray``.

- In the qiskit 0.9.0 release the representation of bits (both qubits and
  classical bits) changed from tuples of the form ``(register, index)`` to be
  instances of the classes ``qiskit.circuit.Qubit`` and
  ``qiskit.circuit.Clbit``. For backwards compatibility comparing
  the equality between a legacy tuple and the bit classes was supported as
  everything transitioned from tuples to being objects. This support is now
  deprecated and will be removed in the future. Everything should use the bit
  classes instead of tuples moving forward.

- When the ``mpl`` output is used for either ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.draw()``
  or ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` and the ``style`` kwarg is
  used, passing in unsupported dictionary keys as part of the ``style```
  dictionary is now deprecated. Where these unknown arguments were previously
  silently ignored, in the future, unsupported keys will raise an exception.

- The ``line length`` kwarg for the ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.draw()`` method
  and the ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` function with the text
  output mode is deprecated. It has been replaced by the ``fold`` kwarg which
  will behave identically for the text output mode (but also now supports
  the mpl output mode too). ``line_length`` will be removed in a future
  release so calls should be updated to use ``fold`` instead.

- The ``fold`` field in the ``style`` dict kwarg for the
  ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.draw()`` method and the
  ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` function has been deprecated. It
  has been replaced by the ``fold`` kwarg on both functions. This kwarg
  behaves identically to the field in the style dict.


.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- Instructions layering which underlies all types of circuit drawing has
  changed to address right/left justification. This sometimes results in
  output which is topologically equivalent to the rendering in prior versions
  but visually different than previously rendered. Fixes
  `issue #2802 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/2802>`_

- Add ``memory_slots`` to ``QobjExperimentHeader`` of pulse Qobj. This fixes
  a bug in the data format of ``meas_level=2`` results of pulse experiments.
  Measured quantum states are returned as a bit string with zero padding
  based on the number set for ``memory_slots``.

- Fixed the visualization of the rzz gate in the latex circuit drawer to match
  the cu1 gate to reflect the symmetry in the rzz gate. The fix is based on
  the cds command of the qcircuit latex package. Fixes
  `issue #1957 <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/issues/1957>`_


.. _Release Notes_0.10.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- ``matplotlib.figure.Figure`` objects returned by visualization functions
  are no longer always closed by default. Instead the returned figure objects
  are only closed if the configured matplotlib backend is an inline jupyter
  backend(either set with ``%matplotlib inline`` or
  ``%matplotlib notebook``). Output figure objects are still closed with
  these backends to avoid duplicate outputs in jupyter notebooks (which is
  why the ``Figure.close()`` were originally added).

Aer 0.3
=======

No Change

Ignis 0.2
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.6
========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.3
==================

No Change

*************
Qiskit 0.12.0
*************

.. _Release Notes_0.9.0:

Terra 0.9
=========

.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Prelude:

Prelude
-------

The 0.9 release includes many new features and many bug fixes. The biggest
changes for this release are new debugging capabilities for PassManagers. This
includes a function to visualize a PassManager, the ability to add a callback
function to a PassManager, and logging of passes run in the PassManager.
Additionally, this release standardizes the way that you can set an initial
layout for your circuit. So now you can leverage ``initial_layout`` the kwarg
parameter on ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` and ``qiskit.execute()`` and the
qubits in the circuit will get laid out on the desire qubits on the device.
Visualization of circuits will now also show this clearly when visualizing a
circuit that has been transpiled with a layout.

.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_New Features:

New Features
------------

- A ``DAGCircuit`` object (i.e. the graph representation of a QuantumCircuit where
  operation dependencies are explicit) can now be visualized with the ``.draw()``
  method. This is in line with Qiskit's philosophy of easy visualization.
  Other objects which support a ``.draw()`` method are ``QuantumCircuit``,
  ``PassManager``, and ``Schedule``.

- Added a new visualization function
  ``qiskit.visualization.plot_error_map()`` to plot the error map for a given
  backend. It takes in a backend object from the qiskit-ibmq-provider and
  will plot the current error map for that device.

- Both ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit.draw()`` and
  ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` now support annotating the
  qubits in the visualization with layout information. If the
  ``QuantumCircuit`` object being drawn includes layout metadata (which is
  normally only set on the circuit output from ``transpile()`` calls) then
  by default that layout will be shown on the diagram. This is done for all
  circuit drawer backends. For example::

      from qiskit import ClassicalRegister, QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister
      from qiskit.compiler import transpile

      qr = QuantumRegister(2, 'userqr')
      cr = ClassicalRegister(2, 'c0')
      qc = QuantumCircuit(qr, cr)
      qc.h(qr[0])
      qc.cx(qr[0], qr[1])
      qc.y(qr[0])
      qc.x(qr[1])
      qc.measure(qr, cr)

      # Melbourne coupling map
      coupling_map = [[1, 0], [1, 2], [2, 3], [4, 3], [4, 10], [5, 4],
                      [5, 6], [5, 9], [6, 8], [7, 8], [9, 8], [9, 10],
                      [11, 3], [11, 10], [11, 12], [12, 2], [13, 1],
                      [13, 12]]
      qc_result = transpile(qc, basis_gates=['u1', 'u2', 'u3', 'cx', 'id'],
                            coupling_map=coupling_map, optimization_level=0)
      qc.draw(output='text')

  will yield a diagram like::

                        
         (userqr0) q0|0> U2(0,pi)  U2(0,pi)  X  U2(0,pi)  U3(pi,pi/2,pi/2) M
                        
         (userqr1) q1|0> U2(0,pi)  U2(0,pi)  U3(pi,0,pi) M
                                                
        (ancilla0) q2|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla1) q3|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla2) q4|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla3) q5|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla4) q6|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla5) q7|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla6) q8|0>
                                                                                        
        (ancilla7) q9|0>
                                                                                        
       (ancilla8) q10|0>
                                                                                        
       (ancilla9) q11|0>
                                                                                        
      (ancilla10) q12|0>
                                                                                        
      (ancilla11) q13|0>
                                                                                        
                c0_0: 0 
                                                                                         
                c0_1: 0 

  If you do not want the layout to be shown on transpiled circuits (or any
  other circuits with a layout set) there is a new boolean kwarg for both
  functions, ``with_layout`` (which defaults ``True``), which when set
  ``False`` will disable the layout annotation in the output circuits.

- A new analysis pass ``CountOpsLongest`` was added to retrieve the number
  of operations on the longest path of the DAGCircuit. When used it will
  add a ``count_ops_longest_path`` key to the property set dictionary.
  You can add it to your a passmanager with something like::

      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import CountOpsLongestPath
      from qiskit.transpiler.passes import CxCancellation
      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

      pm = PassManager()
      pm.append(CountOpsLongestPath())

  and then access the longest path via the property set value with something
  like::

      pm.append(
          CxCancellation(),
          condition=lambda property_set: property_set[
              'count_ops_longest_path'] < 5)

  which will set a condition on that pass based on the longest path.

- Two new functions, ``sech()`` and ``sech_deriv()`` were added to the pulse
  library module ``qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib`` for creating an unnormalized
  hyperbolic secant ``SamplePulse`` object and an unnormalized hyperbolic
  secant derviative ``SamplePulse`` object respectively.

- A new kwarg option ``vertical_compression`` was added to the
  ``QuantumCircuit.draw()`` method and the
  ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` function. This option only works
  with the ``text`` backend. This option can be set to either ``high``,
  ``medium`` (the default), or ``low`` to adjust how much vertical space is
  used by the output visualization.

- A new kwarg boolean option ``idle_wires`` was added to the
  ``QuantumCircuit.draw()`` method and the
  ``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` function. It works for all drawer
  backends. When ``idle_wires`` is set False in a drawer call the drawer will
  not draw any bits that do not have any circuit elements in the output
  quantum circuit visualization.

- A new PassManager visualizer function
  ``qiskit.visualization.pass_mamanger_drawer()`` was added. This function
  takes in a PassManager object and will generate a flow control diagram
  of all the passes run in the PassManager.

- When creating a PassManager you can now specify a callback function that
  if specified will be run after each pass is executed. This function gets
  passed a set of kwargs on each call with the state of the pass manager after
  each pass execution. Currently these kwargs are:

  * ``pass_`` (``Pass``): the pass being run
  * ``dag`` (``DAGCircuit``): the dag output of the pass
  * ``time`` (``float``): the time to execute the pass
  * ``property_set`` (``PropertySet``): the property set
  * ``count`` (``int``): the index for the pass execution

  However, it's worth noting that while these arguments are set for the 0.9
  release they expose the internals of the pass manager and are subject to
  change in future release.

  For example you can use this to create a callback function that will
  visualize the circuit output after each pass is executed::

      from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager

      def my_callback(**kwargs):
          print(kwargs['dag'])

      pm = PassManager(callback=my_callback)

  Additionally you can specify the callback function when using
  ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()``::

      from qiskit.compiler import transpile

      def my_callback(**kwargs):
          print(kwargs['pass'])

      transpile(circ, callback=my_callback)

- A new method ``filter()`` was added to the ``qiskit.pulse.Schedule`` class.
  This enables filtering the instructions in a schedule. For example,
  filtering by instruction type::

      from qiskit.pulse import Schedule
      from qiskit.pulse.commands import Acquire
      from qiskit.pulse.commands import AcquireInstruction
      from qiskit.pulse.commands import FrameChange

      sched = Schedule(name='MyExperiment')
      sched.insert(0, FrameChange(phase=-1.57)(device))
      sched.insert(60, Acquire(5))
      acquire_sched = sched.filter(instruction_types=[AcquireInstruction])

- Additional decomposition methods for several types of gates. These methods
  will use different decomposition techniques to break down a gate into
  a sequence of CNOTs and single qubit gates. The following methods are
  added:

  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | Method                         | Description                           |
  +================================+=======================================+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.iso()``       | Add an arbitrary isometry from m to n |
  |                                | qubits to a circuit. This allows for  |
  |                                | attaching arbitrary unitaries on n    |
  |                                | qubits (m=n) or to prepare any state  |
  |                                | of n qubits (m=0)                     |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.diag_gate()`` | Add a diagonal gate to the circuit    |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.squ()``       | Decompose an arbitrary 2x2 unitary    |
  |                                | into three rotation gates and add to  |
  |                                | a circuit                             |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.ucg()``       | Attach an uniformly controlled gate   |
  |                                | (also called a multiplexed gate) to a |
  |                                | circuit                               |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.ucx()``       | Attach a uniformly controlled (also   |
  |                                | called multiplexed) Rx rotation gate  |
  |                                | to a circuit                          |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.ucy()``       | Attach a uniformly controlled (also   |
  |                                | called multiplexed) Ry rotation gate  |
  |                                | to a circuit                          |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
  | ``QuantumCircuit.ucz()``       | Attach a uniformly controlled (also   |
  |                                | called multiplexed) Rz rotation gate  |
  |                                | to a circuit                          |
  +--------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

- Addition of Gray-Synth and PatelMarkovHayes algorithms for
  synthesis of CNOT-Phase and CNOT-only linear circuits. These functions
  allow the synthesis of circuits that consist of only CNOT gates given
  a linear function or a circuit that consists of only CNOT and phase gates
  given a matrix description.

- A new function ``random_circuit`` was added to the
  ``qiskit.circuit.random`` module. This function will generate a random
  circuit of a specified size by randomly selecting different gates and
  adding them to the circuit. For example, you can use this to generate a
  5-qubit circuit with a depth of 10 using::

      from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit

      circ = random_circuit(5, 10)

- A new kwarg ``output_names`` was added to the
  ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` function. This kwarg takes in a string
  or a list of strings and uses those as the value of the circuit name for
  the output circuits that get returned by the ``transpile()`` call. For
  example::

      from qiskit.compiler import transpile
      my_circs = [circ_a, circ_b]
      tcirc_a, tcirc_b = transpile(my_circs,
                                   output_names=['Circuit A', 'Circuit B'])

  the ``name`` attribute on tcirc_a and tcirc_b will be ``'Circuit A'`` and
  ``'Circuit B'`` respectively.

- A new method ``equiv()`` was added to the ``qiskit.quantum_info.Operator``
  and ``qiskit.quantum_info.Statevector`` classes. These methods are used
  to check whether a second ``Operator`` object or ``Statevector`` is
  equivalent up to global phase.

- The user config file has several new options:

  * The ``circuit_drawer`` field now accepts an `auto` value. When set as
    the value for the ``circuit_drawer`` field the default drawer backend
    will be `mpl` if it is available, otherwise the `text` backend will be
    used.
  * A new field ``circuit_mpl_style`` can be used to set the default style
    used by the matplotlib circuit drawer. Valid values for this field are
    ``bw`` and ``default`` to set the default to a black and white or the
    default color style respectively.
  * A new field ``transpile_optimization_level`` can be used to set the
    default transpiler optimization level to use for calls to
    ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()``. The value can be set to either 0, 1, 2,
    or 3.

- Introduced a new pulse command ``Delay`` which may be inserted into a pulse
  ``Schedule``. This command accepts a ``duration`` and may be added to any
  ``Channel``. Other commands may not be scheduled on a channel during a delay.

  The delay can be added just like any other pulse command. For example::

    from qiskit import pulse

    drive_channel = pulse.DriveChannel(0)
    delay = pulse.Delay(20)

    sched = pulse.Schedule()
    sched += delay(drive_channel)


.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Upgrade Notes:

Upgrade Notes
-------------

- The previously deprecated ``qiskit._util`` module has been removed.
  ``qiskit.util`` should be used instead.

- The ``QuantumCircuit.count_ops()`` method now returns an ``OrderedDict``
  object instead of a ``dict``. This should be compatible for most use cases
  since ``OrderedDict`` is a ``dict`` subclass. However type checks and
  other class checks might need to be updated.

- The ``DAGCircuit.width()`` method now returns the total number quantum bits
  and classical bits. Before it would only return the number of quantum bits.
  If you require just the number of quantum bits you can use
  ``DAGCircuit.num_qubits()`` instead.

- The function ``DAGCircuit.num_cbits()`` has been removed. Instead you can
  use ``DAGCircuit.num_clbits()``.

- Individual quantum bits and classical bits are no longer represented as
  ``(register, index)`` tuples. They are now instances of `Qubit` and
  `Clbit` classes. If you're dealing with individual bits make sure that
  you update any usage or type checks to look for these new classes instead
  of tuples.

- The preset passmanager classes
  ``qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.default_pass_manager`` and
  ``qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers.default_pass_manager_simulator``
  (which were the previous default pass managers for
  ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` calls) have been removed. If you were
  manually using this pass managers switch to the new default,
  ``qiskit.transpile.preset_passmanagers.level1_pass_manager``.

- The ``LegacySwap`` pass has been removed. If you were using it in a custom
  pass manager, it's usage can be replaced by the ``StochasticSwap`` pass,
  which is a faster more stable version. All the preset passmanagers have
  been updated to use ``StochasticSwap`` pass instead of the ``LegacySwap``.

- The following deprecated ``qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`` methods have been
  removed:

  * ``DAGCircuit.get_qubits()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.qubits()`` instead
  * ``DAGCircuit.get_bits()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.clbits()`` instead
  * ``DAGCircuit.qasm()`` - Use a combination of
    ``qiskit.converters.dag_to_circuit()`` and ``QuantumCircuit.qasm()``. For
    example::

      from qiskit.dagcircuit import DAGCircuit
      from qiskit.converters import dag_to_circuit
      my_dag = DAGCircuit()
      qasm = dag_to_circuit(my_dag).qasm()

  * ``DAGCircuit.get_op_nodes()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.op_nodes()`` instead.
    Note that the return type is a list of ``DAGNode`` objects for
    ``op_nodes()`` instead of the list of tuples previously returned by
    ``get_op_nodes()``.
  * ``DAGCircuit.get_gate_nodes()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.gate_nodes()``
    instead. Note that the return type is a list of ``DAGNode`` objects for
    ``gate_nodes()`` instead of the list of tuples previously returned by
    ``get_gate_nodes()``.
  * ``DAGCircuit.get_named_nodes()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.named_nodes()``
    instead. Note that the return type is a list of ``DAGNode`` objects for
    ``named_nodes()`` instead of the list of node_ids previously returned by
    ``get_named_nodes()``.
  * ``DAGCircuit.get_2q_nodes()`` - Use ``DAGCircuit.twoQ_gates()``
    instead. Note that the return type is a list of ``DAGNode`` objects for
    ``twoQ_gates()`` instead of the list of data_dicts previously returned by
    ``get_2q_nodes()``.
  * ``DAGCircuit.get_3q_or_more_nodes()`` - Use
    ``DAGCircuit.threeQ_or_more_gates()`` instead. Note that the return type
    is a list of ``DAGNode`` objects for ``threeQ_or_more_gates()`` instead
    of the list of tuples previously returned by ``get_3q_or_more_nodes()``.

- The following ``qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`` methods had deprecated
  support for accepting a ``node_id`` as a parameter. This has been removed
  and now only ``DAGNode`` objects are accepted as input:

  * ``successors()``
  * ``predecessors()``
  * ``ancestors()``
  * ``descendants()``
  * ``bfs_successors()``
  * ``quantum_successors()``
  * ``remove_op_node()``
  * ``remove_ancestors_of()``
  * ``remove_descendants_of()``
  * ``remove_nonancestors_of()``
  * ``remove_nondescendants_of()``
  * ``substitute_node_with_dag()``

- The ``qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`` method ``rename_register()`` has been
  removed. This was unused by all the qiskit code. If you were relying on it
  externally you'll have to re-implement is an external function.

- The ``qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`` property ``multi_graph`` has been
  removed. Direct access to the underlying ``networkx`` ``multi_graph`` object
  isn't supported anymore. The API provided by the ``DAGCircuit`` class should
  be used instead.

- The deprecated exception class ``qiskit.qiskiterror.QiskitError`` has been
  removed. Instead you should use ``qiskit.exceptions.QiskitError``.

- The boolean kwargs, ``ignore_requires`` and ``ignore_preserves`` from
  the ``qiskit.transpiler.PassManager`` constructor have been removed. These
  are no longer valid options.

- The module ``qiskit.tools.logging`` has been removed. This module was not
  used by anything and added nothing over the interfaces that Python's
  standard library ``logging`` module provides. If you want to set a custom
  formatter for logging use the standard library ``logging`` module instead.

- The ``CompositeGate`` class has been removed. Instead you should
  directly create a instruction object from a circuit and append that to your
  circuit. For example, you can run something like::

      custom_gate_circ = qiskit.QuantumCircuit(2)
      custom_gate_circ.x(1)
      custom_gate_circ.h(0)
      custom_gate_circ.cx(0, 1)
      custom_gate = custom_gate_circ.to_instruction()

- The previously deprecated kwargs, ``seed`` and ``config`` for
  ``qiskit.compiler.assemble()`` have been removed use ``seed_simulator`` and
  ``run_config`` respectively instead.

- The previously deprecated converters
  ``qiskit.converters.qobj_to_circuits()`` and
  ``qiskit.converters.circuits_to_qobj()`` have been removed. Use
  ``qiskit.assembler.disassemble()`` and ``qiskit.compiler.assemble()``
  respectively instead.

- The previously deprecated kwarg ``seed_mapper`` for
  ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` has been removed. Instead you should use
  ``seed_transpiler``

- The previously deprecated kwargs ``seed``, ``seed_mapper``, ``config``,
  and ``circuits`` for the ``qiskit.execute()`` function have been removed.
  Use ``seed_simulator``, ``seed_transpiler``, ``run_config``, and
  ``experiments`` arguments respectively instead.

- The previously deprecated ``qiskit.tools.qcvv`` module has been removed
  use qiskit-ignis instead.

- The previously deprecated functions ``qiskit.transpiler.transpile()`` and
  ``qiskit.transpiler.transpile_dag()`` have been removed. Instead you should
  use ``qiskit.compiler.transpile``. If you were using ``transpile_dag()``
  this can be replaced by running::

      circ = qiskit.converters.dag_to_circuit(dag)
      out_circ = qiskit.compiler.transpile(circ)
      qiskit.converters.circuit_to_dag(out_circ)

- The previously deprecated function ``qiskit.compile()`` has been removed
  instead you should use ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` and
  ``qiskit.compiler.assemble()``.

- The jupyter cell magic ``%%qiskit_progress_bar`` from
  ``qiskit.tools.jupyter`` has been changed to a line magic. This was done
  to better reflect how the magic is used and how it works. If you were using
  the ``%%qiskit_progress_bar`` cell magic in an existing notebook, you will
  have to update this to be a line magic by changing it to be
  ``%qiskit_progress_bar`` instead. Everything else should behave
  identically.

- The deprecated function ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi.random_unitary_matrix()``
  has been removed. You should use the
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.random.random_unitary()`` function instead.

- The deprecated function ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi.random_density_matrix()``
  has been removed. You should use the
  ``qiskit.quantum_info.random.random_density_matrix()`` function
  instead.

- The deprecated function ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi.purity()`` has been removed.
  You should the ``qiskit.quantum_info.purity()`` function instead.

- The deprecated ``QuantumCircuit._attach()`` method has been removed. You
  should use ``QuantumCircuit.append()`` instead.

- The ``qiskit.qasm.Qasm`` method ``get_filename()`` has been removed.
  You can use the ``return_filename()`` method instead.

- The deprecated ``qiskit.mapper`` module has been removed. The list of
  functions and classes with their alternatives are:

  * ``qiskit.mapper.CouplingMap``: ``qiskit.transpiler.CouplingMap`` should
    be used instead.
  * ``qiskit.mapper.Layout``: ``qiskit.transpiler.Layout`` should be used
    instead
  * ``qiskit.mapper.compiling.euler_angles_1q()``:
    ``qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis.euler_angles_1q()`` should be used
    instead
  * ``qiskit.mapper.compiling.two_qubit_kak()``:
    ``qiskit.quantum_info.synthesis.two_qubit_cnot_decompose()`` should be
    used instead.

  The deprecated exception classes ``qiskit.mapper.exceptions.CouplingError``
  and ``qiskit.mapper.exceptions.LayoutError`` don't have an alternative
  since they serve no purpose without a ``qiskit.mapper`` module.

- The ``qiskit.pulse.samplers`` module has been moved to
  ``qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.samplers``. You will need to update imports of
  ``qiskit.pulse.samplers`` to ``qiskit.pulse.pulse_lib.samplers``.

- `seaborn`_ is now a dependency for the function
  ``qiskit.visualization.plot_state_qsphere()``. It is needed to generate
  proper angular color maps for the visualization. The
  ``qiskit-terra[visualization]`` extras install target has been updated to
  install ``seaborn>=0.9.0`` If you are using visualizations and specifically
  the ``plot_state_qsphere()`` function you can use that to install
  ``seaborn`` or just manually run ``pip install seaborn>=0.9.0``

  .. _seaborn: https://seaborn.pydata.org/

- The previously deprecated functions ``qiksit.visualization.plot_state`` and
  ``qiskit.visualization.iplot_state`` have been removed. Instead you should
  use the specific function for each plot type. You can refer to the
  following tables to map the deprecated functions to their equivalent new
  ones:

  ==================================  ========================
  Qiskit Terra 0.6                    Qiskit Terra 0.7+
  ==================================  ========================
  plot_state(rho)                     plot_state_city(rho)
  plot_state(rho, method='city')      plot_state_city(rho)
  plot_state(rho, method='paulivec')  plot_state_paulivec(rho)
  plot_state(rho, method='qsphere')   plot_state_qsphere(rho)
  plot_state(rho, method='bloch')     plot_bloch_multivector(rho)
  plot_state(rho, method='hinton')    plot_state_hinton(rho)
  ==================================  ========================

- The ``pylatexenc`` and ``pillow`` dependencies for the ``latex`` and
  ``latex_source`` circuit drawer backends are no longer listed as
  requirements. If you are going to use the latex circuit drawers ensure
  you have both packages installed or use the setuptools extras to install
  it along with qiskit-terra::

      pip install qiskit-terra[visualization]

- The root of the ``qiskit`` namespace will now emit a warning on import if
  either ``qiskit.IBMQ`` or ``qiskit.Aer`` could not be setup. This will
  occur whenever anything in the ``qiskit`` namespace is imported. These
  warnings were added to make it clear for users up front if they're running
  qiskit and the qiskit-aer and qiskit-ibmq-provider packages could not be
  found. It's not always clear if the packages are missing or python
  packaging/pip installed an element incorrectly until you go to use them and
  get an empty ``ImportError``. These warnings should make it clear up front
  if there these commonly used aliases are missing.

  However, for users that choose not to use either qiskit-aer or
  qiskit-ibmq-provider this might cause additional noise. For these users
  these warnings are easily suppressable using Python's standard library
  ``warnings``. Users can suppress the warnings by putting these two lines
  before any imports from qiskit::

      import warnings
      warnings.filterwarnings('ignore', category=RuntimeWarning,
                              module='qiskit')

  This will suppress the warnings emitted by not having qiskit-aer or
  qiskit-ibmq-provider installed, but still preserve any other warnings
  emitted by qiskit or any other package.


.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Deprecation Notes:

Deprecation Notes
-----------------

- The ``U`` and ``CX`` gates have been deprecated. If you're using these gates
  in your code you should update them to use ``u3`` and ``cx`` instead. For
  example, if you're using the circuit gate functions ``circuit.u_base()``
  and ``circuit.cx_base()`` you should update these to be ``circuit.u3()`` and
  ``circuit.cx()`` respectively.

- The ``u0`` gate has been deprecated in favor of using multiple ``iden``
  gates and it will be removed in the future. If you're using the ``u0`` gate
  in your circuit you should update your calls to use ``iden``. For example,
  f you were using ``circuit.u0(2)`` in your circuit before that should be
  updated to be::

      circuit.iden()
      circuit.iden()

  instead.

- The ``qiskit.pulse.DeviceSpecification`` class is deprecated now. Instead
  you should use ``qiskit.pulse.PulseChannelSpec``.

- Accessing a ``qiskit.circuit.Qubit``, ``qiskit.circuit.Clbit``, or
  ``qiskit.circuit.Bit`` class by index is deprecated (for compatibility
  with the ``(register, index)`` tuples that these classes replaced).
  Instead you should use the ``register`` and ``index`` attributes.

- Passing in a bit to the ``qiskit.QuantumCircuit`` method ``append`` as
  a tuple ``(register, index)`` is deprecated. Instead bit objects should
  be used directly.

- Accessing the elements of a ``qiskit.transpiler.Layout`` object with a
  tuple ``(register, index)`` is deprecated. Instead a bit object should
  be used directly.

- The ``qiskit.transpiler.Layout`` constructor method
  ``qiskit.transpiler.Layout.from_tuplelist()`` is deprecated. Instead the
  constructor ``qiskit.transpiler.Layout.from_qubit_list()`` should be used.

- The module ``qiskit.pulse.ops`` has been deprecated. All the functions it
  provided:

  * ``union``
  * ``flatten``
  * ``shift``
  * ``insert``
  * ``append``

  have equivalent methods available directly on the ``qiskit.pulse.Schedule``
  and ``qiskit.pulse.Instruction`` classes. Those methods should be used
  instead.

- The ``qiskit.qasm.Qasm`` method ``get_tokens()`` is deprecated. Instead
  you should use the ``generate_tokens()`` method.

- The ``qiskit.qasm.qasmparser.QasmParser`` method ``get_tokens()`` is
  deprecated. Instead you should use the ``read_tokens()`` method.

- The ``as_dict()`` method for the Qobj class has been deprecated and will
  be removed in the future. You should replace calls to it with ``to_dict()``
  instead.


.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Bug Fixes:

Bug Fixes
---------

- The definition of the ``CU3Gate`` has been changed to be equivalent to the
  canonical definition of a controlled ``U3Gate``.

- The handling of layout in the pass manager has been standardized. This
  fixes several reported issues with handling layout. The ``initial_layout``
  kwarg parameter on ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` and
  ``qiskit.execute()`` will now lay out your qubits from the circuit onto
  the desired qubits on the device when transpiling circuits.

- Support for n-qubit unitaries was added to the BasicAer simulator and
  ``unitary`` (arbitrary unitary gates) was added to the set of basis gates
  for the simulators

- The ``qiskit.visualization.plost_state_qsphere()`` has been updated to fix
  several issues with it. Now output Q Sphere visualization will be correctly
  generated and the following aspects have been updated:

  * All complementary basis states are antipodal
  * Phase is indicated by color of line and marker on sphere's surface
  * Probability is indicated by translucency of line and volume of marker on
     sphere's surface


.. _Release Notes_0.9.0_Other Notes:

Other Notes
-----------

- The default PassManager for ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` and
  ``qiskit.execute()`` has been changed to optimization level 1 pass manager
  defined at ``qiskit.transpile.preset_passmanagers.level1_pass_manager``.

- All the circuit drawer backends now will express gate parameters in a
  circuit as common fractions of pi in the output visualization. If the value
  of a parameter can be expressed as a fraction of pi that will be used
  instead of the numeric equivalent.

- When using ``qiskit.assembler.assemble_schedules()`` if you do not provide
  the number of memory_slots to use the number will be inferred based on the
  number of acquisitions in the input schedules.

- The deprecation warning on the ``qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit`` property
  ``node_counter`` has been removed. The behavior change being warned about
  was put into effect when the warning was added, so warning that it had
  changed served no purpose.

- Calls to ``PassManager.run()`` now will emit python logging messages at the
  INFO level for each pass execution. These messages will include the Pass
  name and the total execution time of the pass. Python's standard logging
  was used because it allows Qiskit-Terra's logging to integrate in a standard
  way with other applications and libraries. All logging for the transpiler
  occurs under the ``qiskit.transpiler`` namespace, as used by
  ``logging.getLogger('qiskit.transpiler``). For example, to turn on DEBUG
  level logging for the transpiler you can run::

      import logging

      logging.basicConfig()
      logging.getLogger('qiskit.transpiler').setLevel(logging.DEBUG)

  which will set the log level for the transpiler to DEBUG and configure
  those messages to be printed to stderr.

Aer 0.3
=======
- There's a new high-performance Density Matrix Simulator that can be used in
  conjunction with our noise models, to better simulate real world scenarios.
- We have added a Matrix Product State (MPS) simulator. MPS allows for
  efficient simulation of several classes of quantum circuits, even under
  presence of strong correlations and highly entangled states. For cases
  amenable to MPS, circuits with several hundred qubits and more can be exactly
  simulated, e.g., for the purpose of obtaining expectation values of observables.
- Snapshots can be performed in all of our simulators.
- Now we can measure sampling circuits with read-out errors too, not only ideal
  circuits.
- We have increased some circuit optimizations with noise presence.
- A better 2-qubit error approximations have been included.
- Included some tools for making certain noisy simulations easier to craft and
  faster to simulate.
- Increased performance with simulations that require less floating point
  numerical precision.

Ignis 0.2
=========

New Features
------------

- `Logging Module <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-iqx-tutorials/blob/stable/0.12.x/qiskit/advanced/ignis/9_ignis_logging.ipynb>`_
- `Purity RB <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-iqx-tutorials/blob/stable/0.12.x/qiskit/advanced/ignis/5c_purity_rb.ipynb>`_
- `Interleaved RB <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-iqx-tutorials/blob/stable/0.12.x/qiskit/advanced/ignis/5b_interleaved_rb.ipynb>`_
- `Repetition Code for Verification <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-iqx-tutorials/blob/stable/0.12.x/qiskit/advanced/ignis/8_repetition_code.ipynb>`_
- Seed values can now be arbitrarily added to RB (not just in order)
- Support for adding multiple results to measurement mitigation
- RB Fitters now support providing guess values

Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed a bug in RB fit error
- Fixed a bug in the characterization fitter when selecting a qubit index to
  fit

Other Notes
-----------

- Measurement mitigation now operates in parallel when applied to multiple
  results
- Guess values for RB fitters are improved

Aqua 0.6
========

Added
-----

- Relative-Phase Toffoli gates ``rccx`` (with 2 controls) and ``rcccx``
  (with 3 controls).
- Variational form ``RYCRX``
- A new ``'basic-no-ancilla'`` mode to ``mct``.
- Multi-controlled rotation gates ``mcrx``, ``mcry``, and ``mcrz`` as a general
  ``u3`` gate is not supported by graycode implementation
- Chemistry: ROHF open-shell support

  * Supported for all drivers: Gaussian16, PyQuante, PySCF and PSI4
  * HartreeFock initial state, UCCSD variational form and two qubit reduction for
    parity mapping now support different alpha and beta particle numbers for open
    shell support

- Chemistry: UHF open-shell support

  * Supported for all drivers: Gaussian16, PyQuante, PySCF and PSI4
  * QMolecule extended to include integrals, coefficients etc for separate beta

- Chemistry: QMolecule extended with integrals in atomic orbital basis to
  facilitate common access to these for experimentation

  * Supported for all drivers: Gaussian16, PyQuante, PySCF and PSI4

- Chemistry: Additional PyQuante and PySCF driver configuration

  * Convergence tolerance and max convergence iteration controls.
  * For PySCF initial guess choice

- Chemistry: Processing output added to debug log from PyQuante and PySCF
  computations (Gaussian16 and PSI4 outputs were already added to debug log)
- Chemistry: Merged qiskit-chemistry into qiskit-aqua
- Add ``MatrixOperator``, ``WeightedPauliOperator`` and
  ``TPBGroupedPauliOperator`` class.
- Add ``evolution_instruction`` function to get registerless instruction of
  time evolution.
- Add ``op_converter`` module to unify the place in charge of converting
  different types of operators.
- Add ``Z2Symmetries`` class to encapsulate the Z2 symmetries info and has
  helper methods for tapering an Operator.
- Amplitude Estimation: added maximum likelihood postprocessing and confidence
  interval computation.
- Maximum Likelihood Amplitude Estimation (MLAE): Implemented new algorithm for
  amplitude estimation based on maximum likelihood estimation, which reduces
  number of required qubits and circuit depth.
- Added (piecewise) linearly and polynomially controlled Pauli-rotation
  circuits.
- Add ``q_equation_of_motion`` to study excited state of a molecule, and add
  two algorithms to prepare the reference state.

Changed
-------

- Improve ``mct``'s ``'basic'`` mode by using relative-phase Toffoli gates to
  build intermediate results.
- Adapt to Qiskit Terra's newly introduced ``Qubit`` class.
- Prevent ``QPE/IQPE`` from modifying input ``Operator`` objects.
- The PyEDA dependency was removed;
  corresponding oracles' underlying logic operations are now handled by SymPy.
- Refactor the ``Operator`` class, each representation has its own class
  ``MatrixOperator``, ``WeightedPauliOperator`` and ``TPBGroupedPauliOperator``.
- The ``power`` in ``evolution_instruction`` was applied on the theta on the
  CRZ gate directly, the new version repeats the circuits to implement power.
- CircuitCache is OFF by default, and it can be set via environment variable now
  ``QISKIT_AQUA_CIRCUIT_CACHE``.

Bug Fixes
---------

- A bug where ``TruthTableOracle`` would build incorrect circuits for truth
  tables with only a single ``1`` value.
- A bug caused by ``PyEDA``'s indeterminism.
- A bug with ``QPE/IQPE``'s translation and stretch computation.
- Chemistry: Bravyi-Kitaev mapping fixed when num qubits was not a power of 2
- Setup ``initial_layout`` in ``QuantumInstance`` via a list.

Removed
-------

- General multi-controlled rotation gate ``mcu3`` is removed and replaced by
  multi-controlled rotation gates ``mcrx``, ``mcry``, and ``mcrz``

Deprecated
----------
- The ``Operator`` class is deprecated, in favor of using ``MatrixOperator``,
  ``WeightedPauliOperator`` and ``TPBGroupedPauliOperator``.


IBM Q Provider 0.3
==================

No change


*************
Qiskit 0.11.1
*************

We have bumped up Qiskit micro version to 0.11.1 because IBM Q Provider has
bumped its micro version as well.

Terra 0.8
=========

No Change

Aer 0.2
=======

No change

Ignis 0.1
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.5
========

``qiskit-aqua`` has been updated to ``0.5.3`` to fix code related to
changes in how gates inverses are done.

IBM Q Provider 0.3
==================

The ``IBMQProvider`` has been updated to version ``0.3.1`` to fix
backward compatibility issues and work with the default 10 job
limit in single calls to the IBM Q API v2.


***********
Qiskit 0.11
***********

We have bumped up Qiskit minor version to 0.11 because IBM Q Provider has bumped up
its minor version too.
On Aer, we have jumped from 0.2.1 to 0.2.3 because there was an issue detected
right after releasing 0.2.2 and before Qiskit 0.11 went online.

Terra 0.8
=========

No Change

Aer 0.2
=======

New features
------------

- Added support for multi-controlled phase gates
- Added optimized anti-diagonal single-qubit gates

Improvements
------------

- Introduced a technique called Fusion that increments performance of circuit execution
  Tuned threading strategy to gain performance in most common scenarios.
- Some of the already implemented error models have been polished.



Ignis 0.1
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.5
========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.3
==================

The ``IBMQProvider`` has been updated in order to default to use the new
`IBM Q Experience v2 <https://quantum-computing.ibm.com>`__. Accessing the legacy IBM Q Experience v1 and QConsole
will still be supported during the 0.3.x line until its final deprecation one
month from the release. It is encouraged to update to the new IBM Q
Experience to take advantage of the new functionality and features.

Updating to the new IBM Q Experience v2
---------------------------------------

If you have credentials for the legacy IBM Q Experience stored on disk, you
can make use of the interactive helper::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    IBMQ.update_account()


For more complex cases or fine tuning your configuration, the following methods
are available:

* the ``IBMQ.delete_accounts()`` can be used for resetting your configuration
  file.
* the ``IBMQ.save_account('MY_TOKEN')`` method can be used for saving your
  credentials, following the instructions in the `IBM Q Experience v2 <https://quantum-computing.ibm.com>`__
  account page.

Updating your programs
----------------------

When using the new IBM Q Experience v2 through the provider, access to backends
is done via individual ``provider`` instances (as opposed to accessing them
directly through the ``qiskit.IBMQ`` object as in previous versions), which
allows for more granular control over the project you are using.

You can get a reference to the ``providers`` that you have access to using the
``IBMQ.providers()`` and ``IBMQ.get_provider()`` methods::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    provider = IBMQ.load_account()
    my_providers = IBMQ.providers()
    provider_2 = IBMQ.get_provider(hub='A', group='B', project='C')


For convenience, ``IBMQ.load_account()`` and ``IBMQ.enable_account()`` will
return a provider for the open access project, which is the default in the new
IBM Q Experience v2.

For example, the following program in previous versions::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    IBMQ.load_accounts()
    backend = IBMQ.get_backend('ibmqx4')
    backend_2 = IBMQ.get_backend('ibmq_qasm_simulator', hub='HUB2')

Would be equivalent to the following program in the current version::

    from qiskit import IBMQ

    provider = IBMQ.load_account()
    backend = provider.get_backend('ibmqx4')
    provider_2 = IBMQ.get_provider(hub='HUB2')
    backend_2 = provider_2.get_backend('ibmq_qasm_simulator')

You can find more information and details in the `IBM Q Provider documentation <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ibmq-provider>`__.


***********
Qiskit 0.10
***********

Terra 0.8
=========

No Change

Aer 0.2
=======

No Change

Ignis 0.1
=========

No Change

Aqua 0.5
========

No Change

IBM Q Provider 0.2
==================

New Features
------------

- The ``IBMQProvider`` supports connecting to the new version of the IBM Q API.
  Please note support for this version is still experimental :pull_ibmq-provider:`78`.
- Added support for Circuits through the new API :pull_ibmq-provider:`79`.


Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed incorrect parsing of some API hub URLs :pull_ibmq-provider:`77`.
- Fixed noise model handling for remote simulators :pull_ibmq-provider:`84`.


**********
Qiskit 0.9
**********

Terra 0.8
=========



Highlights
----------

- Introduction of the Pulse module under ``qiskit.pulse``, which includes
  tools for building pulse commands, scheduling them on pulse channels,
  visualization, and running them on IBM Q devices.
- Improved QuantumCircuit and Instruction classes, allowing for the
  composition of arbitrary sub-circuits into larger circuits, and also
  for creating parameterized circuits.
- A powerful Quantum Info module under ``qiskit.quantum_info``, providing
  tools to work with operators and channels and to use them inside circuits.
- New transpiler optimization passes and access to predefined transpiling
  routines.



New Features
------------

- The core ``StochasticSwap`` routine is implemented in `Cython <https://cython.org/>`__.
- Added ``QuantumChannel`` classes for manipulating quantum channels and CPTP
  maps.
- Support for parameterized circuits.
- The ``PassManager`` interface has been improved and new functions added for
  easier interaction and usage with custom pass managers.
- Preset ``PassManager``\s are now included which offer a predetermined pipeline
  of transpiler passes.
- User configuration files to let local environments override default values
  for some functions.
- New transpiler passes: ``EnlargeWithAncilla``, ``Unroll2Q``,
  ``NoiseAdaptiveLayout``, ``OptimizeSwapBeforeMeasure``,
  ``RemoveDiagonalGatesBeforeMeasure``, ``CommutativeCancellation``,
  ``Collect2qBlocks``, and ``ConsolidateBlocks``.


Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

As part of the 0.8 release the following things have been deprecated and will
either be removed or changed in a backwards incompatible manner in a future
release. While not strictly necessary these are things to adjust for before the
0.9 (unless otherwise noted) release to avoid a breaking change in the future.

* The methods prefixed by ``_get`` in the ``DAGCircuit`` object are being
  renamed without that prefix.
* Changed elements in ``couplinglist`` of ``CouplingMap`` from tuples to lists.
* Unroller bases must now be explicit, and violation raises an informative
  ``QiskitError``.
* The ``qiskit.tools.qcvv`` package is deprecated and will be removed in the in
  the future. You should migrate to using the Qiskit Ignis which replaces this
  module.
* The ``qiskit.compile()`` function is now deprecated in favor of explicitly
  using the ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` function to transform a circuit,
  followed by ``qiskit.compiler.assemble()`` to make a Qobj out of
  it. Instead of ``compile(...)``, use ``assemble(transpile(...), ...)``.
* ``qiskit.converters.qobj_to_circuits()`` has been deprecated and will be
  removed in a future release. Instead
  ``qiskit.assembler.disassemble()`` should be used to extract
  ``QuantumCircuit`` objects from a compiled Qobj.
* The ``qiskit.mapper`` namespace has been deprecated. The ``Layout`` and
  ``CouplingMap`` classes can be accessed via ``qiskit.transpiler``.
* A few functions in ``qiskit.tools.qi.qi`` have been deprecated and
  moved to ``qiskit.quantum_info``.

Please note that some backwards incompatible changes have been made during this
release. The following notes contain information on how to adapt to these
changes.

IBM Q Provider
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IBM Q provider was previously included in Terra, but it has been split out
into a separate package ``qiskit-ibmq-provider``. This will need to be
installed, either via pypi with ``pip install qiskit-ibmq-provider`` or from
source in order to access ``qiskit.IBMQ`` or ``qiskit.providers.ibmq``. If you
install qiskit with ``pip install qiskit``, that will automatically install
all subpackages of the Qiskit project.



Cython Components
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Starting in the 0.8 release the core stochastic swap routine is now implemented
in `Cython <https://cython.org/>`__. This was done to significantly improve the performance of the
swapper, however if you build Terra from source or run on a non-x86 or other
platform without prebuilt wheels and install from source distribution you'll
need to make sure that you have Cython installed prior to installing/building
Qiskit Terra. This can easily be done with pip/pypi: ``pip install Cython``.




Compiler Workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``qiskit.compile()`` function has been deprecated and replaced by first
calling ``qiskit.compiler.transpile()`` to run optimization and mapping on a
circuit, and then ``qiskit.compiler.assemble()`` to build a Qobj from that
optimized circuit to send to a backend. While this is only a deprecation it
will emit a warning if you use the old ``qiskit.compile()`` call.

**transpile(), assemble(), execute() parameters**

These functions are heavily overloaded and accept a wide range of inputs.
They can handle circuit and pulse inputs. All kwargs except for ``backend``
for these functions now also accept lists of the previously accepted types.
The ``initial_layout`` kwarg can now be supplied as a both a list and dictionary,
e.g. to map a Bell experiment on qubits 13 and 14, you can supply:
``initial_layout=[13, 14]`` or ``initial_layout={qr[0]: 13, qr[1]: 14}``



Qobj
^^^^

The Qobj class has been split into two separate subclasses depending on the
use case, either ``PulseQobj`` or ``QasmQobj`` for pulse and circuit jobs
respectively. If you're interacting with Qobj directly you may need to
adjust your usage accordingly.

The ``qiskit.qobj.qobj_to_dict()`` is removed. Instead use the ``to_dict()``
method of a Qobj object.



Visualization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The largest change to the visualization module is it has moved from
``qiskit.tools.visualization`` to ``qiskit.visualization``. This was done to
indicate that the visualization module is more than just a tool. However, since
this interface was declared stable in the 0.7 release the public interface off
of ``qiskit.tools.visualization`` will continue to work. That may change in a
future release, but it will be deprecated prior to removal if that happens.

The previously deprecated functions, ``plot_circuit()``,
``latex_circuit_drawer()``, ``generate_latex_source()``, and
``matplotlib_circuit_drawer()`` from ``qiskit.tools.visualization`` have been
removed. Instead of these functions, calling
``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` with the appropriate arguments should
be used.

The previously deprecated ``plot_barriers`` and ``reverse_bits`` keys in
the ``style`` kwarg dictionary are deprecated, instead the
``qiskit.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` kwargs ``plot_barriers`` and
``reverse_bits`` should be used.

The Wigner plotting functions ``plot_wigner_function``, ``plot_wigner_curve``,
``plot_wigner_plaquette``, and ``plot_wigner_data`` previously in the
``qiskit.tools.visualization._state_visualization`` module have been removed.
They were never exposed through the public stable interface and were not well
documented. The code to use this feature can still be accessed through the
qiskit-tutorials repository.



Mapper
^^^^^^

The public api from ``qiskit.mapper`` has been moved into ``qiskit.transpiler``.
While it has only been deprecated in this release, it will be removed in the
0.9 release so updating your usage of ``Layout`` and ``CouplingMap`` to import
from ``qiskit.transpiler`` instead of ``qiskit.mapper`` before that takes place
will avoid any surprises in the future.






Aer 0.2
=======

New Features
------------

- Added multiplexer gate :pull_aer:`192`
- Added ``remap_noise_model`` function to ``noise.utils`` :pull_aer:`181`
- Added ``__eq__`` method to ``NoiseModel``, ``QuantumError``, ``ReadoutError``
  :pull_aer:`181`
- Added support for labelled gates in noise models :pull_aer:`175`
- Added optimized ``mcx``, ``mcy``, ``mcz``, ``mcu1``, ``mcu2``, ``mcu3``,
  gates to ``QubitVector`` :pull_aer:`124`
- Added optimized controlled-swap gate to ``QubitVector`` :pull_aer:`142`
- Added gate-fusion optimization for ``QasmController``, which is enabled by
  setting ``fusion_enable=true`` :pull_aer:`136`
- Added better management of failed simulations :pull_aer:`167`
- Added qubits truncate optimization for unused qubits :pull_aer:`164`
- Added ability to disable depolarizing error on device noise model
  :pull_aer:`131`
- Added initialize simulator instruction to ``statevector_state``
  :pull_aer:`117`, :pull_aer:`137`
- Added coupling maps to simulators :pull_aer:`93`
- Added circuit optimization framework :pull_aer:`83`
- Added benchmarking :pull_aer:`71`, :pull_aer:`177`
- Added wheels support for Debian-like distributions :pull_aer:`69`
- Added autoconfiguration of threads for qasm simulator :pull_aer:`61`
- Added Simulation method based on Stabilizer Rank Decompositions :pull_aer:`51`
- Added ``basis_gates`` kwarg to ``NoiseModel`` init :pull_aer:`175`.
- Added an optional parameter to ``NoiseModel.as_dict()`` for returning
  dictionaries that can be serialized using the standard json library directly
  :pull_aer:`165`
- Refactor thread management :pull_aer:`50`
- Improve noise transformations :pull_aer:`162`
- Improve error reporting :pull_aer:`160`
- Improve efficiency of parallelization with ``max_memory_mb`` a new parameter
  of ``backend_opts`` :pull_aer:`61`
- Improve u1 performance in ``statevector`` :pull_aer:`123`


Bug Fixes
---------

- Fixed OpenMP clashing problems on macOS for the Terra add-on :pull_aer:`46`




Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

- Deprecated ``"initial_statevector"`` backend option for ``QasmSimulator`` and
  ``StatevectorSimulator`` :pull_aer:`185`
- Renamed ``"chop_threshold"`` backend option to ``"zero_threshold"`` and
  changed default value to 1e-10 :pull_aer:`185`



Ignis 0.1
=========

New Features
------------

* Quantum volume
* Measurement mitigation using tensored calibrations
* Simultaneous RB has the option to align Clifford gates across subsets
* Measurement correction can produce a new calibration for a subset of qubits



Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

* RB writes to the minimal set of classical registers (it used to be
  Q[i]->C[i]). This change enables measurement correction with RB.
  Unless users had external analysis code, this will not change outcomes.
  RB circuits from 0.1 are not compatible with 0.1.1 fitters.




Aqua 0.5
========

New Features
------------

* Implementation of the HHL algorithm supporting ``LinearSystemInput``
* Pluggable component ``Eigenvalues`` with variant ``EigQPE``
* Pluggable component ``Reciprocal`` with variants ``LookupRotation`` and
  ``LongDivision``
* Multiple-Controlled U1 and U3 operations ``mcu1`` and ``mcu3``
* Pluggable component ``QFT`` derived from component ``IQFT``
* Summarized the transpiled circuits at the DEBUG logging level
* ``QuantumInstance`` accepts ``basis_gates`` and ``coupling_map`` again.
* Support to use ``cx`` gate for the entanglement in ``RY`` and ``RYRZ``
  variational form (``cz`` is the default choice)
* Support to use arbitrary mixer Hamiltonian in QAOA, allowing use of QAOA
  in constrained optimization problems [arXiv:1709.03489]
* Added variational algorithm base class ``VQAlgorithm``, implemented by
  ``VQE`` and ``QSVMVariational``
* Added ``ising/docplex.py`` for automatically generating Ising Hamiltonian
  from optimization models of DOcplex
* Added ``'basic-dirty-ancilla``' mode for ``mct``
* Added ``mcmt`` for Multi-Controlled, Multi-Target gate
* Exposed capabilities to generate circuits from logical AND, OR, DNF
  (disjunctive normal forms), and CNF (conjunctive normal forms) formulae
* Added the capability to generate circuits from ESOP (exclusive sum of
  products) formulae with optional optimization based on Quine-McCluskey and ExactCover
* Added ``LogicalExpressionOracle`` for generating oracle circuits from
  arbitrary Boolean logic expressions (including DIMACS support) with optional
  optimization capability
* Added ``TruthTableOracle`` for generating oracle circuits from truth-tables
  with optional optimization capability
* Added ``CustomCircuitOracle`` for generating oracle from user specified
  circuits
* Added implementation of the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
* Added implementation of the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
* Added implementation of the Simon's algorithm
* Added implementation of the Shor's algorithm
* Added optional capability for Grover's algorithm to take a custom
  initial state (as opposed to the default uniform superposition)
* Added capability to create a ``Custom`` initial state using existing
  circuit
* Added the ADAM (and AMSGRAD) optimization algorithm
* Multivariate distributions added, so uncertainty models now have univariate
  and multivariate distribution components
* Added option to include or skip the swaps operations for qft and iqft
  circuit constructions
* Added classical linear system solver ``ExactLSsolver``
* Added parameters ``auto_hermitian`` and ``auto_resize`` to ``HHL`` algorithm
  to support non-Hermitian and non :math:`2^n` sized matrices by default
* Added another feature map, ``RawFeatureVector``, that directly maps feature
  vectors to qubits' states for classification
* ``SVM_Classical`` can now load models trained by ``QSVM``



Bug Fixes
---------

* Fixed ``ising/docplex.py`` to correctly multiply constant values in constraints
* Fixed package setup to correctly identify namespace packages using
  ``setuptools.find_namespace_packages``



Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

* ``QuantumInstance`` does not take ``memory`` anymore.
* Moved command line and GUI to separate repo
  (``qiskit_aqua_uis``)
* Removed the ``SAT``-specific oracle (now supported by
  ``LogicalExpressionOracle``)
* Changed ``advanced`` mode implementation of ``mct``: using simple ``h`` gates
  instead of ``ch``, and fixing the old recursion step in ``_multicx``
* Components ``random_distributions`` renamed to ``uncertainty_models``
* Reorganized the constructions of various common gates (``ch``, ``cry``,
  ``mcry``, ``mct``, ``mcu1``, ``mcu3``, ``mcmt``, ``logic_and``, and
  ``logic_or``) and circuits (``PhaseEstimationCircuit``,
  ``BooleanLogicCircuits``, ``FourierTransformCircuits``,
  and ``StateVectorCircuits``) under the ``circuits`` directory
* Renamed the algorithm ``QSVMVariational`` to ``VQC``, which stands for
  Variational Quantum Classifier
* Renamed the algorithm ``QSVMKernel`` to ``QSVM``
* Renamed the class ``SVMInput`` to ``ClassificationInput``
* Renamed problem type ``'svm_classification'`` to ``'classification'``
* Changed the type of ``entangler_map`` used in ``FeatureMap`` and
  ``VariationalForm`` to list of lists



IBM Q Provider 0.1
==================

New Features
------------

- This is the first release as a standalone package. If you
  are installing Terra standalone you'll also need to install the
  ``qiskit-ibmq-provider`` package with ``pip install qiskit-ibmq-provider`` if
  you want to use the IBM Q backends.

- Support for non-Qobj format jobs has been removed from
  the provider. You'll have to convert submissions in an older format to
  Qobj before you can submit.



**********
Qiskit 0.8
**********

In Qiskit 0.8 we introduced the Qiskit Ignis element. It also includes the
Qiskit Terra element 0.7.1 release which contains a bug fix for the BasicAer
Python simulator.

Terra 0.7
=========

No Change

Aer 0.1
=======

No Change

Ignis 0.1
=========

This is the first release of Qiskit Ignis.



**********
Qiskit 0.7
**********

In Qiskit 0.7 we introduced Qiskit Aer and combined it with Qiskit Terra.



Terra 0.7
=========

New Features
------------

This release includes several new features and many bug fixes. With this release
the interfaces for circuit diagram, histogram, bloch vectors, and state
visualizations are declared stable. Additionally, this release includes a
defined and standardized bit order/endianness throughout all aspects of Qiskit.
These are all declared as stable interfaces in this release which won't have
breaking changes made moving forward, unless there is appropriate and lengthy
deprecation periods warning of any coming changes.

There is also the introduction of the following new features:

- A new ASCII art circuit drawing output mode
- A new circuit drawing interface off of ``QuantumCircuit`` objects that
  enables calls of ``circuit.draw()`` or ``print(circuit)`` to render a drawing
  of circuits
- A visualizer for drawing the DAG representation of a circuit
- A new quantum state plot type for hinton diagrams in the local matplotlib
  based state plots
- 2 new constructor methods off the ``QuantumCircuit`` class
  ``from_qasm_str()`` and ``from_qasm_file()`` which let you easily create a
  circuit object from OpenQASM
- A new function ``plot_bloch_multivector()`` to plot Bloch vectors from a
  tensored state vector or density matrix
- Per-shot measurement results are available in simulators and select devices.
  These can be accessed by setting the ``memory`` kwarg to ``True`` when
  calling ``compile()`` or ``execute()`` and then accessed using the
  ``get_memory()`` method on the ``Result`` object.
- A ``qiskit.quantum_info`` module with revamped Pauli objects and methods for
  working with quantum states
- New transpile passes for circuit analysis and transformation:
  ``CommutationAnalysis``, ``CommutationTransformation``, ``CXCancellation``,
  ``Decompose``, ``Unroll``, ``Optimize1QGates``, ``CheckMap``,
  ``CXDirection``, ``BarrierBeforeFinalMeasurements``
- New alternative swap mapper passes in the transpiler:
  ``BasicSwap``, ``LookaheadSwap``, ``StochasticSwap``
- More advanced transpiler infrastructure with support for analysis passes,
  transformation passes, a global ``property_set`` for the pass manager, and
  repeat-until control of passes



Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

As part of the 0.7 release the following things have been deprecated and will
either be removed or changed in a backwards incompatible manner in a future
release. While not strictly necessary these are things to adjust for before the
next release to avoid a breaking change.

- ``plot_circuit()``, ``latex_circuit_drawer()``, ``generate_latex_source()``,
  and ``matplotlib_circuit_drawer()`` from qiskit.tools.visualization are
  deprecated. Instead the ``circuit_drawer()`` function from the same module
  should be used, there are kwarg options to mirror the functionality of all
  the deprecated functions.
- The current default output of ``circuit_drawer()`` (using latex and falling
  back on python) is deprecated and will be changed to just use the ``text``
  output by default in future releases.
- The ``qiskit.wrapper.load_qasm_string()`` and
  ``qiskit.wrapper.load_qasm_file()`` functions are deprecated and the
  ``QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_str()`` and
  ``QuantumCircuit.from_qasm_file()`` constructor methods should be used
  instead.
- The ``plot_barriers`` and ``reverse_bits`` keys in the ``style`` kwarg
  dictionary are deprecated, instead the
  ``qiskit.tools.visualization.circuit_drawer()`` kwargs ``plot_barriers`` and
  ``reverse_bits`` should be used instead.
- The functions ``plot_state()`` and ``iplot_state()`` have been depreciated.
  Instead the functions ``plot_state_*()`` and ``iplot_state_*()`` should be
  called for the visualization method required.
- The ``skip_transpiler`` argument has been deprecated from ``compile()`` and
  ``execute()``. Instead you can use the ``PassManager`` directly, just set
  the ``pass_manager`` to a blank ``PassManager`` object with ``PassManager()``
- The ``transpile_dag()`` function ``format`` kwarg for emitting different
  output formats is deprecated, instead you should convert the default output
  ``DAGCircuit`` object to the desired format.
- The unrollers have been deprecated, moving forward only DAG to DAG unrolling
  will be supported.

Please note that some backwards-incompatible changes have been made during this
release. The following notes contain information on how to adapt to these
changes.

Changes to Result objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As part of the rewrite of the Results object to be more consistent and a
stable interface moving forward a few changes have been made to how you access
the data stored in the result object. First the ``get_data()`` method has been
renamed to just ``data()``. Accompanying that change is a change in the data
format returned by the function. It is now returning the raw data from the
backends instead of doing any post-processing. For example, in previous
versions you could call::

   result = execute(circuit, backend).result()
   unitary = result.get_data()['unitary']
   print(unitary)

and that would return the unitary matrix like::

   [[1+0j, 0+0.5j], [0-0.5j][-1+0j]]

But now if you call (with the renamed method)::

   result.data()['unitary']

it will return something like::

   [[[1, 0], [0, -0.5]], [[0, -0.5], [-1, 0]]]

To get the post processed results in the same format as before the 0.7 release
you must use the ``get_counts()``, ``get_statevector()``, and ``get_unitary()``
methods on the result object instead of ``get_data()['counts']``,
``get_data()['statevector']``, and ``get_data()['unitary']`` respectively.

Additionally, support for ``len()`` and indexing on a ``Result`` object has
been removed. Instead you should deal with the output from the post processed
methods on the Result objects.

Also, the ``get_snapshot()`` and ``get_snapshots()`` methods from the
``Result`` class have been removed. Instead you can access the snapshots
using ``Result.data()['snapshots']``.


Changes to Visualization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The largest change made to visualization in the 0.7 release is the removal of
Matplotlib and other visualization dependencies from the project requirements.
This was done to simplify the requirements and configuration required for
installing Qiskit. If you plan to use any visualizations (including all the
jupyter magics) except for the ``text``, ``latex``, and ``latex_source``
output for the circuit drawer you'll you must manually ensure that
the visualization dependencies are installed. You can leverage the optional
requirements to the Qiskit Terra package to do this::

   pip install qiskit-terra[visualization]

Aside from this there have been changes made to several of the interfaces
as part of the stabilization which may have an impact on existing code.
The first is the ``basis`` kwarg in the ``circuit_drawer()`` function
is no longer accepted. If you were relying on the ``circuit_drawer()`` to
adjust the basis gates used in drawing a circuit diagram you will have to
do this priort to calling ``circuit_drawer()``. For example::

   from qiskit.tools import visualization
   visualization.circuit_drawer(circuit, basis_gates='x,U,CX')

will have to be adjusted to be::

   from qiskit import BasicAer
   from qiskit import transpiler
   from qiskit.tools import visualization
   backend = BasicAer.backend('qasm_simulator')
   draw_circ = transpiler.transpile(circuit, backend, basis_gates='x,U,CX')
   visualization.circuit_drawer(draw_circ)

Moving forward the ``circuit_drawer()`` function will be the sole interface
for circuit drawing in the visualization module. Prior to the 0.7 release there
were several other functions which either used different output backends or
changed the output for drawing circuits. However, all those other functions
have been deprecated and that functionality has been integrated as options
on ``circuit_drawer()``.

For the other visualization functions, ``plot_histogram()`` and
``plot_state()`` there are also a few changes to check when upgrading. First
is the output from these functions has changed, in prior releases these would
interactively show the output visualization. However that has changed to
instead return a ``matplotlib.Figure`` object. This provides much more
flexibility and options to interact with the visualization prior to saving or
showing it. This will require adjustment to how these functions are consumed.
For example, prior to this release when calling::

   plot_histogram(counts)
   plot_state(rho)

would open up new windows (depending on matplotlib backend) to display the
visualization. However starting in the 0.7 you'll have to call ``show()`` on
the output to mirror this behavior. For example::

   plot_histogram(counts).show()
   plot_state(rho).show()

or::

   hist_fig = plot_histogram(counts)
   state_fig = plot_state(rho)
   hist_fig.show()
   state_fig.show()

Note that this is only for when running outside of Jupyter. No adjustment is
required inside a Jupyter environment because Jupyter notebooks natively
understand how to render ``matplotlib.Figure`` objects.

However, returning the Figure object provides additional flexibility for
dealing with the output. For example instead of just showing the figure you
can now directly save it to a file by leveraging the ``savefig()`` method.
For example::

   hist_fig = plot_histogram(counts)
   state_fig = plot_state(rho)
   hist_fig.savefig('histogram.png')
   state_fig.savefig('state_plot.png')

The other key aspect which has changed with these functions is when running
under jupyter. In the 0.6 release ``plot_state()`` and ``plot_histogram()``
when running under jupyter the default behavior was to use the interactive
Javascript plots if the externally hosted Javascript library for rendering
the visualization was reachable over the network. If not it would just use
the matplotlib version. However in the 0.7 release this no longer the case,
and separate functions for the interactive plots, ``iplot_state()`` and
``iplot_histogram()`` are to be used instead. ``plot_state()`` and
``plot_histogram()`` always use the matplotlib versions.

Additionally, starting in this release the ``plot_state()`` function is
deprecated in favor of calling individual methods for each method of plotting
a quantum state. While the ``plot_state()`` function will continue to work
until the 0.9 release, it will emit a warning each time it is used. The

==================================  ========================
Qiskit Terra 0.6                    Qiskit Terra 0.7+
==================================  ========================
plot_state(rho)                     plot_state_city(rho)
plot_state(rho, method='city')      plot_state_city(rho)
plot_state(rho, method='paulivec')  plot_state_paulivec(rho)
plot_state(rho, method='qsphere')   plot_state_qsphere(rho)
plot_state(rho, method='bloch')     plot_bloch_multivector(rho)
plot_state(rho, method='hinton')    plot_state_hinton(rho)
==================================  ========================

The same is true for the interactive JS equivalent, ``iplot_state()``. The
function names are all the same, just with a prepended `i` for each function.
For example, ``iplot_state(rho, method='paulivec')`` is
``iplot_state_paulivec(rho)``.

Changes to Backends
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With the improvements made in the 0.7 release there are a few things related
to backends to keep in mind when upgrading. The biggest change is the
restructuring of the provider instances in the root  ``qiskit``` namespace.
The ``Aer`` provider is not installed by default and requires the installation
of the ``qiskit-aer`` package. This package contains the new high performance
fully featured simulator. If you installed via ``pip install qiskit`` you'll
already have this installed. The python simulators are now available under
``qiskit.BasicAer`` and the old C++ simulators are available with
``qiskit.LegacySimulators``. This also means that the implicit fallback to
python based simulators when the C++ simulators are not found doesn't exist
anymore. If you ask for a local C++ based simulator backend, and it can't be
found an exception will be raised instead of just using the python simulator
instead.

Additionally the previously deprecation top level functions ``register()`` and
``available_backends()`` have been removed. Also, the deprecated
``backend.parameters()`` and ``backend.calibration()`` methods have been
removed in favor of ``backend.properties()``. You can refer to the 0.6 release
notes section :ref:`backends` for more details on these changes.

The ``backend.jobs()`` and ``backend.retrieve_jobs()`` calls no longer return
results from those jobs. Instead you must call the ``result()`` method on the
returned jobs objects.

Changes to the compiler, transpiler, and unrollers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As part of an effort to stabilize the compiler interfaces there have been
several changes to be aware of when leveraging the compiler functions.
First it is important to note that the ``qiskit.transpiler.transpile()``
function now takes a QuantumCircuit object (or a list of them) and returns
a QuantumCircuit object (or a list of them). The DAG processing is done
internally now.

You can also easily switch between circuits, DAGs, and Qobj now using the
functions in ``qiskit.converters``.




Aer 0.1
=======

New Features
------------

Aer provides three simulator backends:

- ``QasmSimulator``: simulate experiments and return measurement outcomes
- ``StatevectorSimulator``: return the final statevector for a quantum circuit
  acting on the all zero state
- ``UnitarySimulator``: return the unitary matrix for a quantum circuit

``noise`` module: contains advanced noise modeling features for the
``QasmSimulator``

- ``NoiseModel``, ``QuantumError``, ``ReadoutError`` classes for simulating a
  Qiskit quantum circuit in the presence of errors
- ``errors`` submodule including functions for generating ``QuantumError``
  objects for the following types of quantum errors: Kraus, mixed unitary,
  coherent unitary, Pauli, depolarizing, thermal relaxation, amplitude damping,
  phase damping, combined phase and amplitude damping
- ``device`` submodule for automatically generating a noise model based on the
  ``BackendProperties`` of a device

``utils`` module:

- ``qobj_utils`` provides functions for directly modifying a Qobj to insert
  special simulator instructions not yet supported through the Qiskit Terra API.


Aqua 0.4
========

New Features
------------

- Programmatic APIs for algorithms and components -- each component can now be
  instantiated and initialized via a single (non-empty) constructor call
- ``QuantumInstance`` API for algorithm/backend decoupling --
  ``QuantumInstance`` encapsulates a backend and its settings
- Updated documentation and Jupyter Notebooks illustrating the new programmatic
  APIs
- Transparent parallelization for gradient-based optimizers
- Multiple-Controlled-NOT (cnx) operation
- Pluggable algorithmic component ``RandomDistribution``
- Concrete implementations of ``RandomDistribution``:
  ``BernoulliDistribution``, ``LogNormalDistribution``,
  ``MultivariateDistribution``, ``MultivariateNormalDistribution``,
  ``MultivariateUniformDistribution``, ``NormalDistribution``,
  ``UniformDistribution``, and ``UnivariateDistribution``
- Concrete implementations of ``UncertaintyProblem``:
  ``FixedIncomeExpectedValue``, ``EuropeanCallExpectedValue``, and
  ``EuropeanCallDelta``
- Amplitude Estimation algorithm
- Qiskit Optimization: New Ising models for optimization problems exact cover,
  set packing, vertex cover, clique, and graph partition
- Qiskit AI:

  - New feature maps extending the ``FeatureMap`` pluggable interface:
    ``PauliExpansion`` and ``PauliZExpansion``
  - Training model serialization/deserialization mechanism

- Qiskit Finance:

  - Amplitude estimation for Bernoulli random variable: illustration of
    amplitude estimation on a single qubit problem
  - Loading of multiple univariate and multivariate random distributions
  - European call option: expected value and delta (using univariate
    distributions)
  - Fixed income asset pricing: expected value (using multivariate
    distributions)

- The Pauli string in ``Operator`` class is aligned with Terra 0.7. Now the
  order of a n-qubit pauli string is ``q_{n-1}...q{0}`` Thus, the (de)serialier
  (``save_to_dict`` and ``load_from_dict``) in the ``Operator`` class are also
  changed to adopt the changes of ``Pauli`` class.

Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

- ``HartreeFock`` component of pluggable type ``InitialState`` moved to Qiskit
  Chemistry
- ``UCCSD`` component of pluggable type ``VariationalForm`` moved to Qiskit
  Chemistry


**********
Qiskit 0.6
**********

Terra 0.6
=========

Highlights
----------

This release includes a redesign of internal components centered around a new,
formal communication format (Qobj), along with long awaited features to
improve the user experience as a whole. The highlights, compared to the 0.5
release, are:

- Improvements for inter-operability (based on the Qobj specification) and
  extensibility (facilities for extending Qiskit with new backends in a
  seamless way)
- New options for handling credentials and authentication for the IBM Q
  backends, aimed at simplifying the process and supporting automatic loading
  of user credentials
- A revamp of the visualization utilities: stylish interactive visualizations
  are now available for Jupyter users, along with refinements for the circuit
  drawer (including a matplotlib-based version)
- Performance improvements centered around circuit transpilation: the basis for
  a more flexible and modular architecture have been set, including
  parallelization of the circuit compilation and numerous optimizations


Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

Please note that some backwards-incompatible changes have been introduced
during this release -- the following notes contain information on how to adapt
to the new changes.

Removal of ``QuantumProgram``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As hinted during the 0.5 release, the deprecation of the  ``QuantumProgram``
class has now been completed and is no longer available, in favor of working
with the individual components (:class:`~qiskit.backends.basejob.BaseJob`,
:class:`~qiskit._quantumcircuit.QuantumCircuit`,
:class:`~qiskit._classicalregister.ClassicalRegister`,
:class:`~qiskit._quantumregister.QuantumRegister`,
:mod:`~qiskit`) directly.

Please check the :ref:`0.5 release notes <quantum-program-0-5>` and the
examples for details about the transition::


  from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, ClassicalRegister, QuantumRegister
  from qiskit import Aer, execute

  q = QuantumRegister(2)
  c = ClassicalRegister(2)
  qc = QuantumCircuit(q, c)

  qc.h(q[0])
  qc.cx(q[0], q[1])
  qc.measure(q, c)

  backend = get_backend('qasm_simulator')

  job_sim = execute(qc, backend)
  sim_result = job_sim.result()

  print("simulation: ", sim_result)
  print(sim_result.get_counts(qc))


IBM Q Authentication and ``Qconfig.py``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The managing of credentials for authenticating when using the IBM Q backends has
been expanded, and there are new options that can be used for convenience:

1. save your credentials in disk once, and automatically load them in future
   sessions. This provides a one-off mechanism::

     from qiskit import IBMQ
     IBMQ.save_account('MY_API_TOKEN', 'MY_API_URL')

   afterwards, your credentials can be automatically loaded from disk by invoking
   :meth:`~qiskit.backends.ibmq.ibmqprovider.IBMQ.load_accounts`::

     from qiskit import IBMQ
     IBMQ.load_accounts()

   or you can load only specific accounts if you only want to use those in a session::

     IBMQ.load_accounts(project='MY_PROJECT')

2. use environment variables. If ``QE_TOKEN`` and ``QE_URL`` is set, the
   ``IBMQ.load_accounts()`` call will automatically load the credentials from
   them.

Additionally, the previous method of having a ``Qconfig.py`` file in the
program folder and passing the credentials explicitly is still supported.


.. _backends:

Working with backends
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A new mechanism has been introduced in Terra 0.6 as the recommended way for
obtaining a backend, allowing for more powerful and unified filtering and
integrated with the new credentials system. The previous top-level methods
:meth:`~qiskit.wrapper._wrapper.register`,
:meth:`~qiskit.wrapper._wrapper.available_backends` and
:meth:`~qiskit.wrapper._wrapper.get_backend` are still supported, but will
deprecated in upcoming versions in favor of using the `qiskit.IBMQ` and
`qiskit.Aer` objects directly, which allow for more complex filtering.

For example, to list and use a local backend::

  from qiskit import Aer

  all_local_backends = Aer.backends(local=True)  # returns a list of instances
  qasm_simulator = Aer.backends('qasm_simulator')

And for listing and using remote backends::

  from qiskit import IBMQ

  IBMQ.enable_account('MY_API_TOKEN')
  5_qubit_devices = IBMQ.backends(simulator=True, n_qubits=5)
  ibmqx4 = IBMQ.get_backend('ibmqx4')

Please note as well that the names of the local simulators have been
simplified. The previous names can still be used, but it is encouraged to use
the new, shorter names:

=============================  ========================
Qiskit Terra 0.5               Qiskit Terra 0.6
=============================  ========================
'local_qasm_simulator'         'qasm_simulator'
'local_statevector_simulator'  'statevector_simulator'
'local_unitary_simulator_py'   'unitary_simulator'
=============================  ========================


Backend and Job API changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Jobs submitted to IBM Q backends have improved capabilities. It is possible
  to cancel them and replenish credits (``job.cancel()``), and to retrieve
  previous jobs executed on a specific backend either by job id
  (``backend.retrieve_job(job_id)``) or in batch of latest jobs
  (``backend.jobs(limit)``)

* Properties for checking each individual job status (``queued``, ``running``,
  ``validating``, ``done`` and ``cancelled``) no longer exist. If you
  want to check the job status, use the identity comparison against
  ``job.status``::

    from qiskit.backends import JobStatus

    job = execute(circuit, backend)
    if job.status() is JobStatus.RUNNING:
        handle_job(job)

Please consult the new documentation of the
:class:`~qiskit.backends.ibmq.ibmqjob.IBMQJob` class to get further insight
in how to use the simplified API.

* A number of members of :class:`~qiskit.backends.basebackend.BaseBackend`
  and :class:`~qiskit.backends.basejob.BaseJob` are no longer properties,
  but methods, and as a result they need to be invoked as functions.

  =====================  ========================
  Qiskit Terra 0.5       Qiskit Terra 0.6
  =====================  ========================
  backend.name           backend.name()
  backend.status         backend.status()
  backend.configuration  backend.configuration()
  backend.calibration    backend.properties()
  backend.parameters     backend.jobs()
                         backend.retrieve_job(job_id)
  job.status             job.status()
  job.cancelled          job.queue_position()
  job.running            job.cancel()
  job.queued
  job.done
  =====================  ========================


Better Jupyter tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The new release contains improvements to the user experience while using
Jupyter notebooks.

First, new interactive visualizations of counts histograms and quantum states
are provided:
:meth:`~qiskit.tools.visualization.plot_histogram` and
:meth:`~qiskit.tools.visualization.plot_state`.
These methods will default to the new interactive kind when the environment
is Jupyter and internet connection exists.

Secondly, the new release provides Jupyter cell magics for keeping track of
the progress of your code. Use ``%%qiskit_job_status`` to keep track of the
status of submitted jobs to IBM Q backends. Use ``%%qiskit_progress_bar`` to
keep track of the progress of compilation/execution.



**********
Qiskit 0.5
**********

Terra 0.5
=========

Highlights
----------

This release brings a number of improvements to Qiskit, both for the user
experience and under the hood. Please refer to the full changelog for a
detailed description of the changes - the highlights are:

* new ``statevector`` :mod:`simulators <qiskit.backends.local>` and feature and
  performance improvements to the existing ones (in particular to the C++
  simulator), along with a reorganization of how to work with backends focused
  on extensibility and flexibility (using aliases and backend providers)
* reorganization of the asynchronous features, providing a friendlier interface
  for running jobs asynchronously via :class:`Job` instances
* numerous improvements and fixes throughout the Terra as a whole, both for
  convenience of the users (such as allowing anonymous registers) and for
  enhanced functionality (such as improved plotting of circuits)


Compatibility Considerations
----------------------------

Please note that several backwards-incompatible changes have been introduced
during this release as a result of the ongoing development. While some of these
features will continue to be supported during a period of time before being
fully deprecated, it is recommended to update your programs in order to prepare
for the new versions and take advantage of the new functionality.

.. _quantum-program-0-5:


``QuantumProgram`` changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several methods of the :class:`~qiskit.QuantumProgram` class are on their way
to being deprecated:

* methods for interacting **with the backends and the API**:

  The recommended way for opening a connection to the IBM Q API and for using
  the backends is through the
  top-level functions directly instead of
  the ``QuantumProgram`` methods. In particular, the
  :func:`qiskit.register` method provides the equivalent of the previous
  :func:`qiskit.QuantumProgram.set_api` call. In a similar vein, there is a new
  :func:`qiskit.available_backends`, :func:`qiskit.get_backend` and related
  functions for querying the available backends directly. For example, the
  following snippet for version 0.4::

    from qiskit import QuantumProgram

    quantum_program = QuantumProgram()
    quantum_program.set_api(token, url)
    backends = quantum_program.available_backends()
    print(quantum_program.get_backend_status('ibmqx4')

  would be equivalent to the following snippet for version 0.5::

    from qiskit import register, available_backends, get_backend

    register(token, url)
    backends = available_backends()
    backend = get_backend('ibmqx4')
    print(backend.status)

* methods for **compiling and executing programs**:

  The top-level functions now also provide
  equivalents for the :func:`qiskit.QuantumProgram.compile` and
  :func:`qiskit.QuantumProgram.execute` methods. For example, the following
  snippet from version 0.4::

    quantum_program.execute(circuit, args, ...)

  would be equivalent to the following snippet for version 0.5::

    from qiskit import execute

    execute(circuit, args, ...)

In general, from version 0.5 onwards we encourage to try to make use of the
individual objects and classes directly instead of relying on
``QuantumProgram``. For example, a :class:`~qiskit.QuantumCircuit` can be
instantiated and constructed by appending :class:`~qiskit.QuantumRegister`,
:class:`~qiskit.ClassicalRegister`, and gates directly. Please check the
update example in the Quickstart section, or the
``using_qiskit_core_level_0.py`` and ``using_qiskit_core_level_1.py``
examples on the main repository.

Backend name changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to provide a more extensible framework for backends, there have been
some design changes accordingly:

* **local simulator names**

  The names of the local simulators have been homogenized in order to follow
  the same pattern: ``PROVIDERNAME_TYPE_simulator_LANGUAGEORPROJECT`` -
  for example, the C++ simulator previously named ``local_qiskit_simulator``
  is now ``local_qasm_simulator_cpp``. An overview of the current
  simulators:

  * ``QASM`` simulator is supposed to be like an experiment. You apply a
    circuit on some qubits, and observe measurement results - and you repeat
    for many shots to get a histogram of counts via ``result.get_counts()``.
  * ``Statevector`` simulator is to get the full statevector (:math:`2^n`
    amplitudes) after evolving the zero state through the circuit, and can be
    obtained via ``result.get_statevector()``.
  * ``Unitary`` simulator is to get the unitary matrix equivalent of the
    circuit, returned via ``result.get_unitary()``.
  * In addition, you can get intermediate states from a simulator by applying
    a ``snapshot(slot)`` instruction at various spots in the circuit. This will
    save the current state of the simulator in a given slot, which can later
    be retrieved via ``result.get_snapshot(slot)``.

* **backend aliases**:

  The SDK now provides an "alias" system that allows for automatically using
  the most performant simulator of a specific type, if it is available in your
  system. For example, with the following snippet::

    from qiskit import get_backend

    backend = get_backend('local_statevector_simulator')

  the backend will be the C++ statevector simulator if available, falling
  back to the Python statevector simulator if not present.

More flexible names and parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several functions of the SDK have been made more flexible and user-friendly:

* **automatic circuit and register names**

  :class:`qiskit.ClassicalRegister`, :class:`qiskit.QuantumRegister` and
  :class:`qiskit.QuantumCircuit` can now be instantiated without explicitly
  giving them a name - a new autonaming feature will automatically assign them
  an identifier::

    q = QuantumRegister(2)

  Please note as well that the order of the parameters have been swapped
  ``QuantumRegister(size, name)``.

* **methods accepting names or instances**

  In combination with the autonaming changes, several methods such as
  :func:`qiskit.Result.get_data` now accept both names and instances for
  convenience. For example, when retrieving the results for a job that has a
  single circuit such as::

    qc = QuantumCircuit(..., name='my_circuit')
    job = execute(qc, ...)
    result = job.result()

  The following calls are equivalent::

    data = result.get_data('my_circuit')
    data = result.get_data(qc)
    data = result.get_data()
